
 
 
 
 <GO> 
 from fairest crea tur we de sir in creas , 
 that there bi beau ti 's rose might nev er die , 
 but as the riper should by time de ceas , 
 hi ten der heir might bear hi mem o ri : 
 but thou con tract to thine own bright eye , 
 feed'st thi light 's flame with self - sub stan ti fuel , 
 make a famin where abund lie , 
 thi self thi foe , to thi sweet self too cru el : 
 thou that art now the world 's fresh or na ment , 
 and onli her ald to the gau di spring , 
 with in thine own bud buri est thi con tent , 
 and ten der churl mak'st wast in nig gard : 
 piti the world , or els thi glut ton be , 
 to eat the world 's due , by the grave and thee . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when for ti win ter shall be sieg thi brow , 
 and dig deep trench in thi beau ti 's field , 
 thi youth 's proud liv eri so gaze on now , 
 will be a tat ter weed of small worth held : 
 then be ask , where all thi beau ti lie , 
 where all the trea sur of thi lusti day ; 
 to say with in thine own deep sunken eye , 
 were an al l-eat shame , and thrift less prais . 
 how much more prais de serv thi beau ti 's use , 
 if thou couldst an swer 'thi fair child of mine 
 shall sum my count , and make my old ex cus ' 
 prove hi beau ti by suc cess thine . 
 thi were to be new made when thou art old , 
 and see thi blood warm when thou feel'st it cold . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 look in thi glass and tell the face thou viewest , 
 now is the time that face should form an oth , 
 whose fresh re pair if now thou not re newest , 
 thou dost be guil the world , un b less some moth er . 
 for where is she so fair whose un ear womb 
 dis dain the tillag of thi hus ban dri ? 
 or who is he so fond will be the tomb , 
 of hi self -lov to stop poster ? 
 thou art thi moth er 's glass and she in thee 
 call back the love april of her prime , 
 so thou through win dow of thine age shalt see , 
 de spit of wrin kl thi thi gold en time . 
 but if thou live re memb not to be , 
 die singl and thine imag die with thee . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 un thrifti loveli whi dost thou spend , 
 upon thi self thi beau ti 's legaci ? 
 natur 's be quest give noth but doth lend , 
 and be frank she lend to those are free : 
 then beau teou nig gard whi dost thou abus , 
 the boun teou largess giv en thee to give ? 
 prof it less usur whi dost thou use 
 so great a sum of sum yet canst not live ? 
 for have traf fic with thi self alon , 
 thou of thi self thi sweet self dost de ceiv , 
 then how when natur call thee to be gone , 
 what ac cept au dit canst thou leav ? 
 thi unus beau ti must be tomb with thee , 
 which use live th ' ex ecu tor to be . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 those hour that with gen tl work did frame 
 the love gaze where everi eye doth dwell 
 will play the tyrant to the veri same , 
 and that un fair which fair li doth ex cel : 
 for nev er-rest time lead sum mer on 
 to hideou win ter and con found him there , 
 sap check with frost and lusti leav quit gone , 
 beau ti o'er-s now and bare everi where : 
 then were not sum mer 's dis til left 
 a liq uid prison pent in wall of glass , 
 beau ti 's ef fect with beau ti were bereft , 
 nor it nor no re mem br what it wa . 
 but flower dis til though they with win ter meet , 
 lees but their show , their sub stanc still live sweet . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 then let not win ter 's rag hand de fac , 
 in thee thi sum mer ere thou be dis til : 
 make sweet some vial ; trea sur thou some place , 
 with beau ti 's trea sur ere it be self -k il : 
 that use is not for bid den usuri , 
 which hap pi those that pay the will loan ; 
 that 's for thi self to breed an oth thee , 
 or ten time hap pi er be it ten for one , 
 ten time thi self were hap pi er than thou art , 
 if ten of thine ten time re fig ur thee : 
 then what could death do if thou shouldst de part , 
 leav thee live in poster ? 
 be not self -wil for thou art much too fair , 
 to be death 's con quest and make worm thine heir . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 lo in the ori ent when the gra ciou light 
 lift up hi burn head , each un der eye 
 doth homag to hi new-ap pear sight , 
 serv with look hi sacr ma jesti , 
 and have climb the steep -up heav en li hill , 
 re sem bl strong youth in hi mid dl age , 
 yet mor tal look ador hi beau ti still , 
 at tend on hi gold en pil grimag : 
 but when from high most pitch with weari car , 
 like fee bl age he reeleth from the day , 
 the eye ( fore du teou ) now con vert are 
 from hi low tract and look an oth way : 
 so thou , thi self out - go in thi noon : 
 un look on di est un less thou get a son . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 mu sic to hear , whi hear'st thou mu sic sadli ? 
 sweet with sweet war not , joy de light in joy : 
 whi lov'st thou that which thou re ceiv'st not gladli , 
 or els re ceiv'st with plea sur thine an noy ? 
 if the true con cord of well- tun sound , 
 by union mar ri do of fend thine ear , 
 they do but sweet li chide thee , who con found 
 in singl the part that thou shouldst bear : 
 mark how one string sweet hus band to an oth , 
 strike each in each by mu tu al or der ; 
 re sem bl sire , and child , and hap pi moth er , 
 who all in one , one pleas note do sing : 
 whose speech less song be mani , seem one , 
 sing thi to thee , 'thou singl wilt prove none ' . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 is it for fear to wet a wid ow 's eye , 
 that thou con sum'st thi self in singl life ? 
 ah , if thou is sue less shalt hap to die , 
 the world will wail thee like a make less wife , 
 the world will be thi wid ow and still weep , 
 that thou no form of thee hast left be hind , 
 when everi pri vat wid ow well may keep , 
 by chil dren 's eye , her hus band 's shape in mind : 
 look what an un thrift in the world doth spend 
 shift but hi place , for still the world en joy it ; 
 but beau ti 's wast hath in the world an end , 
 and kept unus the user so de stroy it : 
 no love to ward oth er in that bo som sit 
 that on him self such mur d'rou shame com mit . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 for shame deni that thou bear'st love to ani 
 who for thi self art so un provid . 
 grant if thou wilt , thou art belov of mani , 
 but that thou none lov'st is most evid : 
 for thou art so pos sess with mur d'rou hate , 
 that 'gainst thi self thou stick 'st not to con spir , 
 seek that beau teou roof to ru inat 
 which to re pair should be thi chief de sir : 
 o chang thi thought , that i may chang my mind , 
 shall hate be fair er lodg than gen tl love ? 
 be as thi pres enc is gra ciou and kind , 
 or to thi self at least kind- heart prove , 
 make thee an oth self for love of me , 
 that beau ti still may live in thine or thee . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 as fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow'st , 
 in one of thine , from that which thou de partest , 
 and that fresh blood which youngli thou be stow'st , 
 thou mayst call thine , when thou from youth con vertest , 
 here in live wis dom , beau ti , and in creas , 
 with out thi fol li , age , and cold de cay , 
 if all were mind so , the time should ceas , 
 and three scor year would make the world away : 
 let those whom natur hath not made for store , 
 harsh , fea ture less , and rude , bar ren li per ish : 
 look whom she best en dow , she gave thee more ; 
 which boun teou gift thou shouldst in boun ti cher ish : 
 she carv thee for her seal , and meant there bi , 
 thou shouldst print more , not let that copi die . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when i do count the clock that tell the time , 
 and see the brave day sunk in hideou night , 
 when i be hold the vi o let past prime , 
 and sabl curl all sil ver o'er with white : 
 when lofti tree i see bar ren of leav , 
 which erst from heat did canopi the herd 
 and sum mer 's green all gird up in sheav 
 born on the bier with white and bristli beard : 
 then of thi beau ti do i ques tion make 
 that thou among the wast of time must go , 
 sinc sweet and beau ti do them selv for sak , 
 and die as fast as they see oth er grow , 
 and noth 'gainst time 's scyth can make de fenc 
 save breed to brave him , when he take thee henc . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o that you were your self , but love you are 
 no longer your , than you your self here live , 
 against thi come end you should prepar , 
 and your sweet sem blanc to some oth er give . 
 so should that beau ti which you hold in leas 
 find no de ter min , then you were 
 your self again af ter your self 's de ceas , 
 when your sweet issu your sweet form should bear . 
 who let so fair a hous fall to de cay , 
 which hus ban dri in ho n our might up hold , 
 against the stor mi gust of win ter 's day 
 and bar ren rage of death 's etern cold ? 
 o none but un thrift , dear my love you know , 
 you had a fa ther , let your son say so . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 not from the star do i my judge ment pluck , 
 and yet me think i have as trono mi , 
 but not to tell of good , or evil luck , 
 of plagu , of dearth , or sea son ' qual i ti , 
 nor can i for tun to brief min ut tell ; 
 point to each hi thun der , rain and wind , 
 or say with princ if it shall go well 
 by oft pre dict that i in heav en find . 
 but from thine eye my knowl edg i de riv , 
 and con stant star in them i read such art 
 as truth and beau ti shall to geth thrive 
 if from thi self , to store thou wouldst con vert : 
 or els of thee thi i prog nost , 
 thi end is truth 's and beau ti 's doom and date . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when i con sid everi thing that grow 
 hold in per fect but a lit tl mo ment . 
 that thi huge stage pre sen teth nought but show 
 where on the star in se cret in flu enc com ment . 
 when i per ceiv that men as plant in creas , 
 cheer and check even by the self -sam sky : 
 vaunt in their youth sap , at height de creas , 
 and wear their brave state out of mem o ri . 
 then the con ceit of thi in con st stay , 
 set you most rich in youth be for my sight , 
 where wast time de bateth with de cay 
 to chang your day of youth to sul li night , 
 and all in war with time for love of you , 
 as he take from you , i en graft you new . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 but where for do not you a might i er way 
 make war upon thi bloo di tyrant time ? 
 and for ti fi your self in your de cay 
 with mean more bless than my bar ren rhyme ? 
 now stand you on the top of hap pi hour , 
 and mani maid en gar den yet un set , 
 with vir tu ou wish would bear you live flower , 
 much lik er than your paint coun ter feit : 
 so should the line of life that life re pair 
 which thi ( time 's pen cil ) or my pupil pen 
 nei ther in in ward worth nor out ward fair 
 can make you live your self in eye of men . 
 to give away your self , keep your self still , 
 and you must live drawn by your own sweet skill . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 who will be liev my vers in time to come 
 if it were fill with your most high desert ? 
 though yet heav en know it is but as a tomb 
 which hide your life , and show not half your part : 
 if i could write the beau ti of your eye , 
 and in fresh num ber num ber all your grace , 
 the age to come would say thi poet lie , 
 such heav en li touch ne'er touch earth li face . 
 so should my pa per ( yel low with their age ) 
 be scorn , like old men of less truth than tongu , 
 and your true right be term a poet 's rage , 
 and stretch metr of an an tiqu song . 
 but were some child of your aliv that time , 
 you should live twice in it , and in my rhyme . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 shall i com par thee to a sum mer 's day ? 
 thou art more love and more tem per : 
 rough wind do shake the darl bud of may , 
 and sum mer 's leas hath all too short a date : 
 some tim too hot the eye of heav en shine , 
 and of ten is hi gold com plex ion dim , 
 and everi fair from fair some tim de clin , 
 by chanc , or natur 's chang cours untrim : 
 but thi etern sum mer shall not fade , 
 nor lose pos sess of that fair thou ow'st , 
 nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in hi shade , 
 when in etern line to time thou grow'st , 
 so long as men can breath or eye can see , 
 so long live thi , and thi give life to thee . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 de vour time blunt thou the lion 's paw , 
 and make the earth de vour her own sweet brood , 
 pluck the keen teeth from the fierc tiger 's jaw , 
 and burn the long-liv phoenix , in her blood , 
 make glad and sor ri sea son as thou fleet'st , 
 and do whate' thou wilt swift- foot time 
 to the wide world and all her fade sweet : 
 but i for bid thee one most heinou crime , 
 o carv not with thi hour my love 's fair brow , 
 nor draw no line there with thine an tiqu pen , 
 him in thi cours un taint do al low , 
 for beau ti 's pat tern to suc ceed men . 
 yet do thi worst old time : de spit thi wrong , 
 my love shall in my vers ever live young . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 a woman 's face with natur 's own hand paint , 
 hast thou the mas ter mis tress of my pas sion , 
 a woman 's gen tl heart but not ac quaint 
 with shift chang as is fals women 's fash ion , 
 an eye more bright than their , less fals in roll : 
 gild the ob ject where upon it gazeth , 
 a man in hue all hue in hi con trol , 
 which steal men 's eye and women 's soul amazeth . 
 and for a woman wert thou first cre at , 
 till natur as she wrought thee fell a- dot , 
 and by ad dit me of thee de feat , 
 by ad one thing to my pur pos noth . 
 but sinc she prick thee out for women 's plea sur , 
 mine be thi love and thi love 's use their trea sur . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 so is it not with me as with that muse , 
 stir by a paint beau ti to hi vers , 
 who heav en it self for or na ment doth use , 
 and everi fair with hi fair doth re hears , 
 make a cou ple ment of proud com par 
 with sun and moon , with earth and sea 's rich gem : 
 with april 's first-born flower and all thing rare , 
 that heav en 's air in thi huge ron dur hem . 
 o let me true in love but truli write , 
 and then be liev me , my love is as fair , 
 as ani moth er 's child , though not so bright 
 as those gold can dl fix in heav en 's air : 
 let them say more that like of hearsay well , 
 i will not prais that pur pos not to sell . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 my glass shall not per suad me i am old , 
 so long as youth and thou are of one date , 
 but when in thee time 's fur row i be hold , 
 then look i death my day should ex pi at . 
 for all that beau ti that doth cov er thee , 
 is but the seem li rai ment of my heart , 
 which in thi breast doth live , as thine in me , 
 how can i then be el der than thou art ? 
 o there for love be of thy self so wari , 
 as i not for my self , but for thee will , 
 bear thi heart which i will keep so chari 
 as ten der nurs her babe from fare ill. 
 pre sum not on thi heart when mine is slain , 
 thou gav'st me thine not to give back again . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 as an un per fect ac tor on the stage , 
 who with hi fear is put besid hi part , 
 or some fierc thing re plet with too much rage , 
 whose strength 's abund weak en hi own heart ; 
 so i for fear of trust , for get to say , 
 the per fect cer e moni of love 's rite , 
 and in mine own love 's strength seem to de cay , 
 o'er charg with bur then of mine own love 's might : 
 o let my look be then the elo qu , 
 and dumb pre sag of my speak breast , 
 who plead for love , and look for rec om pens , 
 more than that tongu that more hath more ex press . 
 o learn to read what silent love hath writ , 
 to hear with eye be long to love 's fine wit . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 mine eye hath play the painter and hath stell , 
 thi beau ti 's form in tabl of my heart , 
 my bodi is the frame where in 't is held , 
 and per spect it is best painter 's art . 
 for through the painter must you see hi skill , 
 to find where your true imag pic tur lie , 
 which in my bo som 's shop is hang still , 
 that hath hi win dow glaze with thine eye : 
 now see what good turn eye for eye have done , 
 mine eye have drawn thi shape , and thine for me 
 are win dow to my breast , where-through the sun 
 de light to peep , to gaze there in on thee ; 
 yet eye thi cun want to grace their art , 
 they draw but what they see , know not the heart . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 let those who are in favour with their star , 
 of pub lic ho n our and proud titl boast , 
 whilst i whom for tun of such tri umph bar 
 un look for joy in that i ho n our most ; 
 great princ ' favourit their fair leav spread , 
 but as the marigold at the sun 's eye , 
 and in them selv their pride lie buri , 
 for at a frown they in their glo ri die . 
 the pain war rior fa mous for fight , 
 af ter a thou sand vic tori onc foil , 
 is from the book of ho n our raze quit , 
 and all the rest for got for which he toil : 
 then hap pi i that love and am belov 
 where i may not re mov nor be re mov . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 lord of my love , to whom in vas salag 
 thi mer it hath my duti strongli knit ; 
 to thee i send thi writ ten em bas sag 
 to wit duti , not to show my wit . 
 duti so great , which wit so poor as mine 
 may make seem bare , in want word to show it ; 
 but that i hope some good con ceit of thine 
 in thi soul 's thought ( all nake ) will be stow it : 
 till what so ev star that guid my move , 
 point on me gra cious with fair as pect , 
 and put ap par el on my tat ter love , 
 to show me wor thi of thi sweet re spect , 
 then may i dare to boast how i do love thee , 
 till then , not show my head where thou mayst prove me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 weari with toil , i hast me to my bed , 
 the dear re spos for limb with trav el tire , 
 but then be gin a jour ney in my head 
 to work my mind , when bodi 's work 's ex pir . 
 for then my thought ( from far where i abid ) 
 in tend a zeal ou pil grimag to thee , 
 and keep my droop eye lid open wide , 
 look on dark which the blind do see . 
 save that my soul 's imag i nari sight 
 present thi shad ow to my sight less view , 
 which like a jew el ( hung in ghastli night ) 
 make black night beau teou , and her old face new . 
 lo thu by day my limb , by night my mind , 
 for thee , and for my self , no qui et find . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 how can i then re turn in hap pi plight 
 that am de bar the ben e fit of rest ? 
 when day 's op press is not eas by night , 
 but day by night and night by day op press . 
 and each ( though en e mi to ei ther 's reign ) 
 do in con sent shake hand to tor tur me , 
 the one by toil , the oth er to com plain 
 how far i toil , still far ther off from thee . 
 i tell the day to pleas him thou art bright , 
 and dost him grace when cloud do blot the heav en : 
 so flat ter i the swart- com plex ion night , 
 when sparkl star twire not thou gild'st the even . 
 but day doth daili draw my sor row longer , 
 and night doth nightli make grief 's length seem stronger 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when in dis grac with for tun and men 's eye , 
 i all alon be weep my out cast state , 
 and trou bl deaf heav en with my boot less cri , 
 and look upon my self and curs my fate , 
 wish me like to one more rich in hope , 
 fea tur like him , like him with friend pos sess , 
 de sir thi man 's art , and that man 's scope , 
 with what i most en joy con tent least , 
 yet in these thought my self al most de spis , 
 hap li i think on thee , and then my state , 
 ( like to the lark at break of day aris 
 from sullen earth ) sing hymn at heav en 's gate , 
 for thi sweet love re memb such wealth bring , 
 that then i scorn to chang my state with king . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when to the ses sion of sweet silent thought , 
 i sum mon up re mem br of thing past , 
 i sigh the lack of mani a thing i sought , 
 and with old woe new wail my dear time 's wast : 
 then can i drown an eye ( unus to flow ) 
 for pre ciou friend hid in death 's date less night , 
 and weep afresh love 's long sinc can cel woe , 
 and moan th ' ex pens of mani a van ish sight . 
 then can i griev at griev anc fore gon , 
 and heav ili from woe to woe tell o'er 
 the sad ac count of fore-be moan moan , 
 which i new pay as if not paid be for . 
 but if the while i think on thee ( dear friend ) 
 all loss are restor , and sor row end . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 thi bo som is en dear with all heart , 
 which i by lack have sup pos dead , 
 and there reign love and all love 's love part , 
 and all those friend which i thought buri . 
 how mani a holi and ob se qui tear 
 hath dear re li gi love stol'n from mine eye , 
 as in ter est of the dead , which now ap pear , 
 but thing re mov that hid den in thee lie . 
 thou art the grave where buri love doth live , 
 hung with the trophi of my lover gone , 
 who all their part of me to thee did give , 
 that due of mani , now is thine alon . 
 their imag i love , i view in thee , 
 and thou ( all they ) hast all the all of me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 if thou sur viv my well- cont day , 
 when that churl death my bone with dust shall cov er 
 and shalt by for tun onc more re- sur vey 
 these poor rude line of thi de ceas lover : 
 com par them with the bet t'r of the time , 
 and though they be out strip by everi pen , 
 re serv them for my love , not for their rhyme , 
 ex ceed by the height of hap pi er men . 
 o then vouch saf me but thi love thought , 
 'had my friend 's muse grown with thi grow age , 
 a dear er birth than thi hi love had brought 
 to march in rank of bet ter equipag : 
 but sinc he die and poet bet ter prove , 
 their for their style i 'll read , hi for hi love ' . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 full mani a glo ri ou morn have i seen , 
 flat ter the moun tain top with sov er eign eye , 
 kiss with gold en face the mead ow green ; 
 gild pale stream with heav en li al che mi : 
 anon per mit the basest cloud to ride , 
 with ugli rack on hi ce lesti face , 
 and from the for lorn world hi vis ag hide 
 steal un seen to west with thi dis grac : 
 even so my sun one ear li morn did shine , 
 with all tri umphant splen dour on my brow , 
 but out alack , he wa but one hour mine , 
 the re gion cloud hath mask him from me now . 
 yet him for thi , my love no whit dis daineth , 
 sun of the world may stain , when heav en 's sun staineth . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 whi didst thou promis such a beau teou day , 
 and make me trav el forth with out my cloak , 
 to let base cloud o'er tak me in my way , 
 hide thi brav'ri in their rot ten smoke ? 
 't is not enough that through the cloud thou break , 
 to dri the rain on my stor m-beat en face , 
 for no man well of such a salv can speak , 
 that heal the wound , and cure not the dis grac : 
 nor can thi shame give physic to my grief , 
 though thou re pent , yet i have still the loss , 
 th ' of fend 's sor row lend but weak re lief 
 to him that bear the strong of fenc 's cross . 
 ah but those tear are pearl which thi love shed , 
 and they are rich , and ran som all ill deed . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 no more be griev at that which thou hast done , 
 rose have thorn , and sil ver foun tain mud , 
 cloud and eclips stain both moon and sun , 
 and loath som canker live in sweet est bud . 
 all men make fault , and even i in thi , 
 au thor thi tres pass with com par , 
 my self cor rupt salv thi amiss , 
 ex cus thi sin more than thi sin are : 
 for to thi sen su al fault i bring in sens , 
 thi ad vers par ti is thi ad voc , 
 and 'gainst my self a law plea com menc : 
 such civ il war is in my love and hate , 
 that i an ac ces sari need must be , 
 to that sweet thief which sourli rob from me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 let me con fess that we two must be twain , 
 al though our un di vid love are one : 
 so shall those blot that do with me re main , 
 with out thi help , by me be born alon . 
 in our two love there is but one re spect , 
 though in our live a sep ar spite , 
 which though it al ter not love 's sole ef fect , 
 yet doth it steal sweet hour from love 's de light . 
 i may not ever mor ac knowl edg thee , 
 lest my be wail guilt should do thee shame , 
 nor thou with pub lic kind ho n our me , 
 un less thou take that ho n our from thi name : 
 but do not so , i love thee in such sort , 
 as thou be mine , mine is thi good re port . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 as a de crepit fa ther take de light , 
 to see hi ac tiv child do deed of youth , 
 so i , made lame by for tun 's dear est spite 
 take all my com fort of thi worth and truth . 
 for whether beau ti , birth , or wealth , or wit , 
 or ani of these all , or all , or more 
 en ti tl in thi part , do crown sit , 
 i make my love en graft to thi store : 
 so then i am not lame , poor , nor de spis , 
 whilst that thi shad ow doth such sub stanc give , 
 that i in thi abund am suff ic , 
 and by a part of all thi glo ri live : 
 look what is best , that best i wish in thee , 
 thi wish i have , then ten time hap pi me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 how can my muse want sub ject to in vent 
 while thou dost breath that pour'st into my vers , 
 thine own sweet ar gu ment , too ex cel , 
 for everi vul gar pa per to re hears ? 
 o give thi self the thank if aught in me , 
 wor thi pe rus stand against thi sight , 
 for who 's so dumb that can not write to thee , 
 when thou thi self dost give in vent light ? 
 be thou the tenth muse , ten time more in worth 
 than those old nine which rhymer in voc , 
 and he that call on thee , let him bring forth 
 etern num ber to out liv long date . 
 if my slight muse do pleas these cu ri ou day , 
 the pain be mine , but thine shall be the prais . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o how thi worth with man ner may i sing , 
 when thou art all the bet ter part of me ? 
 what can mine own prais to mine own self bring : 
 and what is't but mine own when i prais thee ? 
 even for thi , let us di vid live , 
 and our dear love lose name of singl one , 
 that by thi sep ar i may give : 
 that due to thee which thou de serv'st alon : 
 o ab senc what a tor ment wouldst thou prove , 
 were it not thi sour leisur gave sweet leav , 
 to en ter tain the time with thought of love , 
 which time and thought so sweet li doth de ceiv . 
 and that thou teach est how to make one twain , 
 by prais him here who doth henc re main . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 take all my love , my love , yea take them all , 
 what hast thou then more than thou hadst be for ? 
 no love , my love , that thou mayst true love call , 
 all mine wa thine , be for thou hadst thi more : 
 then if for my love , thou my love re ceivest , 
 i can not blame thee , for my love thou us est , 
 but yet be blame , if thou thi self de ceivest 
 by wil tast of what thi self re fus est . 
 i do for giv thi rob beri gen tl thief 
 al though thou steal thee all my pover ti : 
 and yet love know it is a greater grief 
 to bear greater wrong , than hate 's known in juri . 
 las civi grace , in whom all ill well show , 
 kill me with spite yet we must not be foe . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 those pret ti wrong that lib er ti com mit , 
 when i am some tim ab sent from thi heart , 
 thi beau ti , and thi year full well be fit , 
 for still temp tat fol low where thou art . 
 gen tl thou art , and there for to be won , 
 beau teou thou art , there for to be as sail . 
 and when a woman woo , what woman 's son , 
 will sourli leav her till he have pre vail ? 
 ay me , but yet thou mightst my seat for bear , 
 and chide thi beau ti , and thi stray youth , 
 who lead thee in their riot even there 
 where thou art forc to break a twofold truth : 
 her by thi beau ti tempt her to thee , 
 thine by thi beau ti be fals to me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 that thou hast her it is not all my grief , 
 and yet it may be said i love her dear li , 
 that she hath thee is of my wail chief , 
 a loss in love that touch me more near li . 
 love of fend thu i will ex cus ye , 
 thou dost love her , be caus thou know'st i love her , 
 and for my sake even so doth she abus me , 
 suf f'r my friend for my sake to ap prov her . 
 if i lose thee , my loss is my love 's gain , 
 and lose her , my friend hath found that loss , 
 both find each oth er , and i lose both twain , 
 and both for my sake lay on me thi cross , 
 but here 's the joy , my friend and i are one , 
 sweet flat teri , then she love but me alon . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when most i wink then do mine eye best see , 
 for all the day they view thing un re spect , 
 but when i sleep , in dream they look on thee , 
 and dark li bright , are bright in dark di rect . 
 then thou whose shad ow shad ow doth make bright 
 how would thi shad ow 's form , form hap pi show , 
 to the clear day with thi much clear er light , 
 when to unse eye thi shade shine so ! 
 how would ( i say ) mine eye be bless made , 
 by look on thee in the live day , 
 when in dead night thi fair im per fect shade , 
 through heavi sleep on sight less eye doth stay ! 
 all day are night to see till i see thee , 
 and night bright day when dream do show thee me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 if the dull sub stanc of my flesh were thought , 
 in juri dis tanc should not stop my way , 
 for then de spit of space i would be brought , 
 from lim it far re mot , where thou dost stay , 
 no mat ter then al though my foot did stand 
 upon the far thest earth re mov from thee , 
 for nim bl thought can jump both sea and land , 
 as soon as think the place where he would be . 
 but ah , thought kill me that i am not thought 
 to leap larg length of mile when thou art gone , 
 but that so much of earth and wa ter wrought , 
 i must at tend , time 's leisur with my moan . 
 re ceiv nought by el e ment so slow , 
 but heavi tear , badg of ei ther 's woe . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 the oth er two , slight air , and purg fire , 
 are both with thee , wherev i abid , 
 the first my thought , the oth er my de sir , 
 these pre sen t-abs with swift mo tion slide . 
 for when these quick er el e ment are gone 
 in ten der em bassi of love to thee , 
 my life be made of four , with two alon , 
 sink down to death , op press with melan choli . 
 un til life 's com posit be re cur , 
 by those swift mes seng re turn from thee , 
 who even but now come back again as sur , 
 of thi fair health , re count it to me . 
 thi told , i joy , but then no longer glad , 
 i send them back again and straight grow sad . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 mine eye and heart are at a mor tal war , 
 how to di vid the con quest of thi sight , 
 mine eye , my heart thi pic tur 's sight would bar , 
 my heart , mine eye the free dom of that right , 
 my heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie , 
 ( a clos et nev er pierc with crys tal eye ) 
 but the de fend doth that plea deni , 
 and say in him thi fair ap pear lie . 
 to side thi titl is im pan el 
 a quest of thought , all ten ant to the heart , 
 and by their ver dict is de ter min 
 the clear eye 's moi eti , and the dear heart 's part . 
 as thu , mine eye 's due is thi out ward part , 
 and my heart 's right , thi in ward love of heart . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 be twixt mine eye and heart a leagu is took , 
 and each doth good turn now unto the oth er , 
 when that mine eye is fam ish for a look , 
 or heart in love with sigh him self doth smoth er ; 
 with my love 's pic tur then my eye doth feast , 
 and to the paint ban quet bid my heart : 
 an oth time mine eye is my heart 's guest , 
 and in hi thought of love doth share a part . 
 so ei ther by thi pic tur or my love , 
 thi self away , art present still with me , 
 for thou not far ther than my thought canst move , 
 and i am still with them , and they with thee . 
 or if they sleep , thi pic tur in my sight 
 awak my heart , to heart 's and eye 's de light . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 how care wa i when i took my way , 
 each tri fl un der truest bar to thrust , 
 that to my use it might unus stay 
 from hand of false hood , in sure ward of trust ! 
 but thou , to whom my jew el tri fl are , 
 most wor thi com fort , now my great est grief , 
 thou best of dear est , and mine onli care , 
 art left the prey of everi vul gar thief . 
 thee have i not lock up in ani chest , 
 save where thou art not , though i feel thou art , 
 with in the gen tl clo sur of my breast , 
 from whenc at plea sur thou mayst come and part , 
 and even thenc thou wilt be stol'n i fear , 
 for truth prove thievish for a prize so dear . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 against that time ( if ever that time come ) 
 when i shall see thee frown on my de fect , 
 when as thi love hath cast hi ut most sum , 
 call to that au dit by ad vis re spect , 
 against that time when thou shalt strang pass , 
 and scarc greet me with that sun thine eye , 
 when love con vert from the thing it wa 
 shall rea son find of set tl grav i ti ; 
 against that time do i en sconc me here 
 with in the knowl edg of mine own desert , 
 and thi my hand , against my self up rear , 
 to guard the law rea son on thi part , 
 to leav poor me , thou hast the strength of law , 
 sinc whi to love , i can al leg no caus . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 how heavi do i jour ney on the way , 
 when what i seek ( my weari trav el 's end ) 
 doth teach that case and that re pos to say 
 'thu far the mile are mea sur from thi friend . ' 
 the beast that bear me , tire with my woe , 
 plod dul li on , to bear that weight in me , 
 as if by some in stinct the wretch did know 
 hi rid er love not speed be made from thee : 
 the bloo di spur can not pro vok him on , 
 that some tim anger thrust into hi hide , 
 which heav ili he an swer with a groan , 
 more sharp to me than spur to hi side , 
 for that same groan doth put thi in my mind , 
 my grief lie on ward and my joy be hind . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 thu can my love ex cus the slow of fenc , 
 of my dull bear er , when from thee i speed , 
 from where thou art , whi should i hast me thenc ? 
 till i re turn of post is no need . 
 o what ex cus will my poor beast then find , 
 when swift ex trem can seem but slow ? 
 then should i spur though mount on the wind , 
 in wing speed no mo tion shall i know , 
 then can no hors with my de sir keep pace , 
 there for de sir ( of per fec t'st love be made ) 
 shall neigh ( no dull flesh ) in hi fieri race , 
 but love , for love , thu shall ex cus my jade , 
 sinc from thee go , he went wil ful-s low , 
 to ward thee i 'll run , and give him leav to go . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 so am i as the rich whose bless key , 
 can bring him to hi sweet up -lock trea sur , 
 the which he will not everi hour sur vey , 
 for blunt the fine point of sel dom plea sur . 
 there for are feast so solemn and so rare , 
 sinc sel dom come in that long year set , 
 like stone of worth they thin li place are , 
 or cap tain jew el in the car canet . 
 so is the time that keep you as my chest 
 or as the wardrob which the robe doth hide , 
 to make some spe cial in stant spe cial-blest , 
 by new un fold hi im prison pride . 
 bless are you whose wor thi give scope , 
 be had to tri umph , be lack to hope . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 what is your sub stanc , where of are you made , 
 that mil lion of strang shad ow on you tend ? 
 sinc everi one , hath everi one , one shade , 
 and you but one , can everi shad ow lend : 
 de scrib adoni and the coun ter feit , 
 is poor li imit af ter you , 
 on he len 's cheek all art of beau ti set , 
 and you in gre cian tire are paint new : 
 speak of the spring , and foi son of the year , 
 the one doth shad ow of your beau ti show , 
 the oth er as your boun ti doth ap pear , 
 and you in everi bless shape we know . 
 in all ex tern grace you have some part , 
 but you like none , none you for con stant heart . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o how much more doth beau ti beau teou seem , 
 by that sweet or na ment which truth doth give ! 
 the rose look fair , but fair er we it deem 
 for that sweet odour , which doth in it live : 
 the canker bloom have full as deep a dye , 
 as the per fum tinc tur of the rose , 
 hang on such thorn , and play as wan ton li , 
 when sum mer 's breath their mask bud dis c los : 
 but for their vir tu onli is their show , 
 they live un woo , and un re spect fade , 
 die to them selv . sweet rose do not so , 
 of their sweet death , are sweet est odour made : 
 and so of you , beau teou and love youth , 
 when that shall vade , by vers dis til your truth . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 not mar bl , nor the gild mon u ment 
 of princ shall out liv thi pow er rhyme , 
 but you shall shine more bright in these con tent 
 than unswept stone , be smear with slut tish time . 
 when wast war shall statu over turn , 
 and broil root out the work of ma son ri , 
 nor mar hi sword , nor war 's quick fire shall burn : 
 the live record of your mem o ri . 
 'gainst death , and al l-oblivi en mi ti 
 shall you pace forth , your prais shall still find room , 
 even in the eye of all poster 
 that wear thi world out to the end doom . 
 so till the judg ment that your self aris , 
 you live in thi , and dwell in lover ' eye . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 sweet love re new thi forc , be it not said 
 thi edg should blunter be than ap petit , 
 which but to- day by feed is al lay , 
 to- mor row sharp en in hi for mer might . 
 so love be thou , al though to- day thou fill 
 thi hun gri eye , even till they wink with ful , 
 to- mor row see again , and do not kill 
 the spir it of love , with a per petu dul : 
 let thi sad in ter im like the ocean be 
 which part the shore , where two con tract new , 
 come daili to the bank , that when they see : 
 re turn of love , more blest may be the view . 
 or call it win ter , which be full of care , 
 make sum mer 's wel com , thrice more wish , more rare . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 be your slave what should i do but tend , 
 upon the hour , and time of your de sir ? 
 i have no pre ciou time at all to spend ; 
 nor ser vic to do till you re quir . 
 nor dare i chide the world-with out-end hour , 
 whilst i ( my sov er eign ) watch the clock for you , 
 nor think the bit ter of ab senc sour , 
 when you have bid your ser vant onc adieu . 
 nor dare i ques tion with my jeal ou thought , 
 where you may be , or your af fair sup pos , 
 but like a sad slave stay and think of nought 
 save where you are , how hap pi you make those . 
 so true a fool is love , that in your will , 
 ( though you do ani thing ) he think no ill. 
 
 
 <GO> 
 that god for bid , that made me first your slave , 
 i should in thought con trol your time of plea sur , 
 or at your hand th ' ac count of hour to crave , 
 be your vas sal bound to stay your leisur . 
 o let me suf fer ( be at your beck ) 
 th ' im prison ab senc of your lib er ti , 
 and pa tienc tame to suf fer bide each check , 
 with out ac cus you of in juri . 
 be where you list , your char ter is so strong , 
 that you your self may priv i lag your time 
 to what you will , to you it doth be long , 
 your self to par don of self - do crime . 
 i am to wait , though wait so be hell , 
 not blame your plea sur be it ill or well . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 if there be noth new , but that which is , 
 hath been be for , how are our brain be guil , 
 which labour for in vent bear ami 
 the sec ond bur then of a for mer child ! 
 o that record could with a back ward look , 
 even of five hun dr cours of the sun , 
 show me your imag in some an tiqu book , 
 sinc mind at first in char act wa done . 
 that i might see what the old world could say , 
 to thi com pos won der of your frame , 
 whether we are mend , or whether bet ter they , 
 or whether rev o lut be the same . 
 o sure i am the wit of for mer day , 
 to sub ject wors have giv en ad mir prais . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 like as the wave make to ward the peb bl shore , 
 so do our min ut has ten to their end , 
 each chang place with that which goe be for , 
 in se quent toil all for ward do con tend . 
 na tiv onc in the main of light , 
 crawl to matur , where with be crown , 
 crook eclips 'gainst hi glo ri fight , 
 and time that gave , doth now hi gift con found . 
 time doth trans fix the flour ish set on youth , 
 and delv the par al lel in beau ti 's brow , 
 feed on the rar i ti of natur 's truth , 
 and noth stand but for hi scyth to mow . 
 and yet to time in hope , my vers shall stand 
 prais thi worth , de spit hi cru el hand . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 is it thi will , thi imag should keep open 
 my heavi eye lid to the weari night ? 
 dost thou de sir my slum ber should be bro ken , 
 while shad ow like to thee do mock my sight ? 
 is it thi spir it that thou send'st from thee 
 so far from home into my deed to pri , 
 to find out shame and idl hour in me , 
 the scope and tenur of thi jeal ousi ? 
 o no , thi love though much , is not so great , 
 it is my love that keep mine eye awak , 
 mine own true love that doth my rest de feat , 
 to play the watch man ever for thi sake . 
 for thee watch i , whilst thou dost wake else wher , 
 from me far off , with oth er all too near . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 sin of self -lov pos ses seth all mine eye , 
 and all my soul , and all my everi part ; 
 and for thi sin there is no reme di , 
 it is so ground in ward in my heart . 
 me think no face so gra ciou is as mine , 
 no shape so true , no truth of such ac count , 
 and for my self mine own worth do defin , 
 as i all oth er in all worth sur mount . 
 but when my glass show me my self inde 
 beat and chopt with tan an tiqu , 
 mine own self -lov quit con trari i read : 
 self , so self -lov were in iqu . 
 't is thee ( my self ) that for my self i prais , 
 paint my age with beau ti of thi day . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 against my love shall be as i am now 
 with time 's in juri hand crush and o'er worn , 
 when hour have drain hi blood and fill hi brow 
 with line and wrin kl , when hi youth morn 
 hath trav el on to age 's steepi night , 
 and all those beau ti where of now he 's king 
 are van ish , or van ish out of sight , 
 steal away the trea sur of hi spring : 
 for such a time do i now for ti fi 
 against con found age 's cru el knife , 
 that he shall nev er cut from mem o ri 
 my sweet love 's beau ti , though my lover 's life . 
 hi beau ti shall in these black line be seen , 
 and they shall live , and he in them still green . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when i have seen by time 's fell hand de fac 
 the rich-proud cost of out worn buri age , 
 when some tim lofti tow er i see down-ras , 
 and brass etern slave to mor tal rage . 
 when i have seen the hun gri ocean gain 
 ad van tag on the king dom of the shore , 
 and the firm soil win of the wa teri main , 
 in creas store with loss , and loss with store . 
 when i have seen such in ter chang of state , 
 or state it self con found , to de cay , 
 ruin hath taught me thu to ru min 
 that time will come and take my love away . 
 thi thought is as a death which can not choos 
 but weep to have , that which it fear to lose . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 sinc brass , nor stone , nor earth , nor bound less sea , 
 but sad mor tal o'er sway their pow er , 
 how with thi rage shall beau ti hold a plea , 
 whose ac tion is no stronger than a flower ? 
 o how shall sum mer 's hon ey breath hold out , 
 against the wrack sieg of bat t'r day , 
 when rock im pregn are not so stout , 
 nor gate of steel so strong but time de cay ? 
 o fear med it , where alack , 
 shall time 's best jew el from time 's chest lie hid ? 
 or what strong hand can hold hi swift foot back , 
 or who hi spoil of beau ti can for bid ? 
 o none , un less thi mir a cl have might , 
 that in black ink my love may still shine bright . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 tire with all these for rest death i cri , 
 as to be hold desert a beg gar born , 
 and nee di noth trim in jol li ti , 
 and purest faith un hap pili for sworn , 
 and gild ho n our shame mis plac , 
 and maid en vir tu rude strum pet , 
 and right per fect wrong dis grac , 
 and strength by limp sway dis abl 
 and art made tongue-ti by au thor , 
 and fol li ( doc tor- lik ) con trol skill , 
 and sim pl truth mis cal sim plic , 
 and cap tiv good at tend cap tain ill. 
 tire with all these , from these would i be gone , 
 save that to die , i leav my love alon . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 ah where for with in fect should he live , 
 and with hi pres enc grace impi eti , 
 that sin by him ad van tag should achiev , 
 and lace it self with hi so ci eti ? 
 whi should fals paint imit hi cheek , 
 and steal dead seem of hi live hue ? 
 whi should poor beau ti in di rectli seek , 
 rose of shad ow , sinc hi rose is true ? 
 whi should he live , now natur bank rupt is , 
 beg gar of blood to blush through live vein , 
 for she hath no ex chequ now but hi , 
 and proud of mani , live upon hi gain ? 
 o him she store , to show what wealth she had , 
 in day long sinc , be for these last so bad . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 thu is hi cheek the map of day out worn , 
 when beau ti live and die as flower do now , 
 be for these bas tard sign of fair were born , 
 or durst in hab it on a live brow : 
 be for the gold en tress of the dead , 
 the right of sepul chr , were shorn away , 
 to live a sec ond life on sec ond head , 
 ere beau ti 's dead fleec made an oth gay : 
 in him those holi an tiqu hour are seen , 
 with out all or na ment , it self and true , 
 make no sum mer of an oth 's green , 
 rob no old to dress hi beau ti new , 
 and him as for a map doth natur store , 
 to show fals art what beau ti wa of yore . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 those part of thee that the world 's eye doth view , 
 want noth that the thought of heart can mend : 
 all tongu ( the voic of soul ) give thee that due , 
 ut ter bare truth , even so as foe com mend . 
 thi out ward thu with out ward prais is crown , 
 but those same tongu that give thee so thine own , 
 in oth er ac cent do thi prais con found 
 by see far ther than the eye hath shown . 
 they look into the beau ti of thi mind , 
 and that in guess they mea sur by thi deed , 
 then churl their thought ( al though their eye were kind ) 
 to thi fair flower add the rank smell of weed : 
 but whi thi odour match eth not thi show , 
 the soil is thi , that thou dost com mon grow . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 that thou art blame shall not be thi de fect , 
 for slan der 's mark wa ever yet the fair , 
 the or na ment of beau ti is sus pect , 
 a crow that fli in heav en 's sweet est air . 
 so thou be good , slan der doth but ap prov , 
 thi worth the greater be woo of time , 
 for canker vice the sweet est bud doth love , 
 and thou pre sen t'st a pure un stain prime . 
 thou hast pass by the am bush of young day , 
 ei ther not as sail , or vic tor be charg , 
 yet thi thi prais can not be so thi prais , 
 to tie up envi , ever mor en larg , 
 if some sus pect of ill mask not thi show , 
 then thou alon king dom of heart shouldst owe . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 no longer mourn for me when i am dead , 
 than you shall hear the surli sullen bell 
 give warn to the world that i am fled 
 from thi vile world with vilest worm to dwell : 
 nay if you read thi line , re memb not , 
 the hand that writ it , for i love you so , 
 that i in your sweet thought would be for got , 
 if think on me then should make you woe . 
 o if ( i say ) you look upon thi vers , 
 when i ( per hap ) com pound am with clay , 
 do not so much as my poor name re hears ; 
 but let your love even with my life de cay . 
 lest the wise world should look into your moan , 
 and mock you with me af ter i am gone . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o lest the world should task you to recit , 
 what mer it live in me that you should love 
 af ter my death ( dear love ) for get me quit , 
 for you in me can noth wor thi prove . 
 un less you would de vis some vir tu ou lie , 
 to do more for me than mine own desert , 
 and hang more prais upon de ceas i , 
 than nig gard truth would will ingli im part : 
 o lest your true love may seem fals in thi , 
 that you for love speak well of me un tru , 
 my name be buri where my bodi is , 
 and live no more to shame nor me , nor you . 
 for i am shame by that which i bring forth , 
 and so should you , to love thing noth worth . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 that time of year thou mayst in me be hold , 
 when yel low leav , or none , or few do hang 
 upon those bough which shake against the cold , 
 bare ruin choir , where late the sweet bird sang . 
 in me thou seest the twi light of such day , 
 as af ter sun set fadeth in the west , 
 which by and by black night doth take away , 
 death 's sec ond self that seal up all in rest . 
 in me thou seest the glow of such fire , 
 that on the ash of hi youth doth lie , 
 as the death-b , where on it must ex pir , 
 con sum with that which it wa nour ish by . 
 thi thou per ceiv'st , which make thi love more strong , 
 to love that well , which thou must leav ere long . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 but be con tent when that fell ar rest , 
 with out all bail shall car ri me away , 
 my life hath in thi line some in ter est , 
 which for mem o ri still with thee shall stay . 
 when thou re viewest thi , thou dost re view , 
 the veri part wa con se cr to thee , 
 the earth can have but earth , which is hi due , 
 my spir it is thine the bet ter part of me , 
 so then thou hast but lost the dreg of life , 
 the prey of worm , my bodi be dead , 
 the cow ard con quest of a wretch 's knife , 
 too base of thee to be re memb , 
 the worth of that , is that which it con tain , 
 and that is thi , and thi with thee re main . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 so are you to my thought as food to life , 
 or as sweet -sea son show er are to the ground ; 
 and for the peac of you i hold such strife 
 as 'twixt a miser and hi wealth is found . 
 now proud as an en joy , and anon 
 doubt the filch age will steal hi trea sur , 
 now count best to be with you alon , 
 then bet ter that the world may see my plea sur , 
 some tim all full with feast on your sight , 
 and by and by clean starv for a look , 
 pos sess or pur su no de light 
 save what is had , or must from you be took . 
 thu do i pine and sur feit day by day , 
 or glut ton on all , or all away . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 whi is my vers so bar ren of new pride ? 
 so far from vari at or quick chang ? 
 whi with the time do i not glanc asid 
 to new- found method , and to com pound strang ? 
 whi write i still all one , ever the same , 
 and keep in vent in a note weed , 
 that everi word doth al most tell my name , 
 show their birth , and where they did pro ceed ? 
 o know sweet love i al way write of you , 
 and you and love are still my ar gu ment : 
 so all my best is dress old word new , 
 spend again what is al rea di spent : 
 for as the sun is daili new and old , 
 so is my love still tell what is told . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 thi glass will show thee how thi beau ti wear , 
 thi dial how thi pre ciou min ut wast , 
 these va cant leav thi mind 's im print will bear , 
 and of thi book , thi learn mayst thou tast . 
 the wrin kl which thi glass will truli show , 
 of mouth grave will give thee mem o ri , 
 thou by thi dial 's sha di stealth mayst know , 
 time 's thievish progress to etern . 
 look what thi mem o ri can not con tain , 
 com mit to these wast blank , and thou shalt find 
 those chil dren nurs , de liv from thi brain , 
 to take a new ac quaint of thi mind . 
 these off ic , so oft as thou wilt look , 
 shall prof it thee , and much en rich thi book . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 so oft have i in vok thee for my muse , 
 and found such fair as sist in my vers , 
 as everi alien pen hath got my use , 
 and un der thee their poe si dis pers . 
 thine eye , that taught the dumb on high to sing , 
 and heavi ign or aloft to fli , 
 have ad feath er to the learn 's wing , 
 and giv en grace a dou bl ma jesti . 
 yet be most proud of that which i com pil , 
 whose in flu enc is thine , and born of thee , 
 in oth er ' work thou dost but mend the style , 
 and art with thi sweet grace grace be . 
 but thou art all my art , and dost ad vanc 
 as high as learn , my rude ign or . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 whilst i alon did call upon thi aid , 
 my vers alon had all thi gen tl grace , 
 but now my gra ciou num ber are de cay , 
 and my sick muse doth give an oth er place . 
 i grant ( sweet love ) thi love ar gu ment 
 de serv the tra vail of a wor thi er pen , 
 yet what of thee thi poet doth in vent , 
 he rob thee of , and pay it thee again , 
 he lend thee vir tu , and he stole that word , 
 from thi be hav iour , beau ti doth he give 
 and found it in thi cheek : he can af ford 
 no prais to thee , but what in thee doth live . 
 then thank him not for that which he doth say , 
 sinc what he owe thee , thou thi self dost pay . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o how i faint when i of you do write , 
 know a bet ter spir it doth use your name , 
 and in the prais there of spend all hi might , 
 to make me tongue-ti speak of your fame . 
 but sinc your worth ( wide as the ocean is ) 
 the hum bl as the proud est sail doth bear , 
 my sauci bark ( in fe ri or far to hi ) 
 on your broad main doth wil ap pear . 
 your shal low est help will hold me up afloat , 
 whilst he upon your sound less deep doth ride , 
 or ( be wreck ) i am a worth less boat , 
 he of tall build , and of goodli pride . 
 then if he thrive and i be cast away , 
 the worst wa thi , my love wa my de cay . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 or i shall live your epi taph to make , 
 or you sur viv when i in earth am rot ten , 
 from henc your mem o ri death can not take , 
 al though in me each part will be for got ten . 
 your name from henc im mort life shall have , 
 though i ( onc gone ) to all the world must die , 
 the earth can yield me but a com mon grave , 
 when you en tomb in men 's eye shall lie , 
 your mon u ment shall be my gen tl vers , 
 which eye not yet cre at shall o'er-read , 
 and tongu to be , your be shall re hears , 
 when all the breather of thi world are dead , 
 you still shall live ( such vir tu hath my pen ) 
 where breath most breath , even in the mouth of men . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 i grant thou wert not mar ri to my muse , 
 and there for mayst with out at taint o'er look 
 the dedic word which writer use 
 of their fair sub ject , bless everi book . 
 thou art as fair in knowl edg as in hue , 
 find thi worth a lim it past my prais , 
 and there for art en forc to seek anew , 
 some fresh er stamp of the time- bett day . 
 and do so love , yet when they have de vis , 
 what strain touch rhetor can lend , 
 thou truli fair , wert truli sym pa th , 
 in true plain word , by thi true- tel friend . 
 and their gross paint might be bet ter use , 
 where cheek need blood , in thee it is abus . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 i nev er saw that you did paint need , 
 and there for to your fair no paint set , 
 i found ( or thought i found ) you did ex ceed , 
 that bar ren ten der of a poet 's debt : 
 and there for have i slept in your re port , 
 that you your self be ex tant well might show , 
 how far a mod ern quill doth come too short , 
 speak of worth , what worth in you doth grow . 
 thi si lenc for my sin you did im put , 
 which shall be most my glo ri be dumb , 
 for i im pair not beau ti be mute , 
 when oth er would give life , and bring a tomb . 
 there live more life in one of your fair eye , 
 than both your poet can in prais de vis . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 who is it that say most , which can say more , 
 than thi rich prais , that you alon , are you ? 
 in whose con fin im mur is the store , 
 which should ex am pl where your equal grew . 
 lean penuri with in that pen doth dwell , 
 that to hi sub ject lend not some small glo ri , 
 but he that write of you , if he can tell , 
 that you are you , so dig nifi hi stori . 
 let him but copi what in you is writ , 
 not make wors what natur made so clear , 
 and such a coun ter part shall fame hi wit , 
 make hi style ad mir everi where . 
 you to your beau teou bless add a curs , 
 be fond on prais , which make your prais wors . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 my tongue-ti muse in man ner hold her still , 
 while com ment of your prais rich li com pil , 
 re serv their char act with gold en quill , 
 and pre ciou phrase by all the muse file . 
 i think good thought , whilst oth er write good word , 
 and like un lett clerk still cri amen , 
 to everi hymn that abl spir it af ford , 
 in pol ish form of well re fin pen . 
 hear you prais , i say 't is so , 't is true , 
 and to the most of prais add someth more , 
 but that is in my thought , whose love to you 
 ( though word come hind most ) hold hi rank be for , 
 then oth er , for the breath of word re spect , 
 me for my dumb thought , speak in ef fect . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 wa it the proud full sail of hi great vers , 
 bound for the prize of ( all too pre ciou ) you , 
 that did my ripe thought in my brain in hears , 
 make their tomb the womb where in they grew ? 
 wa it hi spir it , by spir it taught to write , 
 abov a mor tal pitch , that struck me dead ? 
 no , nei ther he , nor hi com peer by night 
 give him aid , my vers as ton ish . 
 he nor that af fa bl fa mil iar ghost 
 which nightli gull him with in tel lig , 
 as vic tor of my si lenc can not boast , 
 i wa not sick of ani fear from thenc . 
 but when your coun ten fill up hi line , 
 then lack i mat ter , that en fee bl mine . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 farewel ! thou art too dear for my pos sess , 
 and like enough thou know'st thi es tim , 
 the char ter of thi worth give thee re leas : 
 my bond in thee are all de ter min . 
 for how do i hold thee but by thi grant , 
 and for that rich where is my de serv ? 
 the caus of thi fair gift in me is want , 
 and so my patent back again is swerv . 
 thi self thou gav'st , thi own worth then not know , 
 or me to whom thou gav'st it , els mis tak , 
 so thi great gift upon mis pris grow , 
 come home again , on bet ter judge ment make . 
 thu have i had thee as a dream doth flat ter , 
 in sleep a king , but wake no such mat ter . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when thou shalt be dis pos to set me light , 
 and place my mer it in the eye of scorn , 
 upon thi side , against my self i 'll fight , 
 and prove thee vir tu ou , though thou art for sworn : 
 with mine own weak be best ac quaint , 
 upon thi part i can set down a stori 
 of fault con ceal , where in i am at taint : 
 that thou in lose me , shalt win much glo ri : 
 and i by thi will be a gain er too , 
 for bend all my love thought on thee , 
 the in juri that to my self i do , 
 do thee van tag , dou ble- van tag me . 
 such is my love , to thee i so be long , 
 that for thi right , my self will bear all wrong . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 say that thou didst for sak me for some fault , 
 and i will com ment upon that of fenc , 
 speak of my lame , and i straight will halt : 
 against thi rea son make no de fenc . 
 thou canst not ( love ) dis grac me half so ill , 
 to set a form upon de sir chang , 
 as i 'll my self dis grac , know thi will , 
 i will ac quaint stran gl and look strang : 
 be ab sent from thi walk and in my tongu , 
 thi sweet belov name no more shall dwell , 
 lest i ( too much pro fan ) should do it wronk : 
 and hap li of our old ac quaint tell . 
 for thee , against my self i 'll vow de bat , 
 for i must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 then hate me when thou wilt , if ever , now , 
 now while the world is bent my deed to cross , 
 join with the spite of for tun , make me bow , 
 and do not drop in for an af ter-loss : 
 ah do not , when my heart hath 's cape thi sor row , 
 come in the rear ward of a con quer woe , 
 give not a win di night a rai ni mor row , 
 to linger out a pur pos over throw . 
 if thou wilt leav me , do not leav me last , 
 when oth er pet ti grief have done their spite , 
 but in the on set come , so shall i tast 
 at first the veri worst of for tun 's might . 
 and oth er strain of woe , which now seem woe , 
 com par with loss of thee , will not seem so . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 some glo ri in their birth , some in their skill , 
 some in their wealth , some in their bodi 's forc , 
 some in their gar ment though new- fan gl ill : 
 some in their hawk and hound , some in their hors . 
 and everi hu mour hath hi ad junct plea sur , 
 where in it find a joy abov the rest , 
 but these par tic u lar are not my mea sur , 
 all these i bet ter in one gen er best . 
 thi love is bet ter than high birth to me , 
 rich er than wealth , proud er than gar ment ' cost , 
 of more de light than hawk and hors be : 
 and have thee , of all men 's pride i boast . 
 wretch in thi alon , that thou mayst take , 
 all thi away , and me most wretch cd make . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 but do thi worst to steal thi self away , 
 for term of life thou art as sur mine , 
 and life no longer than thi love will stay , 
 for it de pend upon that love of thine . 
 then need i not to fear the worst of wrong , 
 when in the least of them my life hath end , 
 i see , a bet ter state to me be long 
 than that , which on thi hu mour doth de pend . 
 thou canst not vex me with in con st mind , 
 sinc that my life on thi re volt doth lie , 
 o what a hap pi titl do i find , 
 hap pi to have thi love , hap pi to die ! 
 but what 's so blessed- fair that fear no blot ? 
 thou mayst be fals , and yet i know it not . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 so shall i live , sup pos thou art true , 
 like a de ceiv hus band , so love 's face , 
 may still seem love to me , though al ter new : 
 thi look with me , thi heart in oth er place . 
 for there can live no hatr in thine eye , 
 there for in that i can not know thi chang , 
 in mani 's look , the fals heart 's his tori 
 is writ in mood and frown and wrin kl strang . 
 but heav en in thi cre ation did de cre , 
 that in thi face sweet love should ever dwell , 
 whate' thi thought , or thi heart 's work be , 
 thi look should noth thenc , but sweet tell . 
 how like eve 's appl doth thi beau ti grow , 
 if thi sweet vir tu an swer not thi show . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 they that have pow er to hurt , and will do none , 
 that do not do the thing , they most do show , 
 who move oth er , are them selv as stone , 
 un mov , cold , and to temp tat slow : 
 they rightli do in her it heav en 's grace , 
 and hus band natur 's rich from ex pens , 
 tibey are the lord and own er of their face , 
 oth er , but stew ard of their ex cel : 
 the sum mer 's flower is to the sum mer sweet , 
 though to it self , it onli live and die , 
 but if that flower with base in fect meet , 
 the basest weed out brav hi dig ni ti : 
 for sweet est thing turn sourest by their deed , 
 lili that fes ter , smell far wors than weed . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 how sweet and love dost thou make the shame , 
 which like a canker in the fra grant rose , 
 doth spot the beau ti of thi bud name ! 
 o in what sweet dost thou thi sin en c los ! 
 that tongu that tell the stori of thi day , 
 ( make las civi com ment on thi sport ) 
 can not dis prais , but in a kind of prais , 
 name thi name , bless an ill re port . 
 o what a man sion have those vice got , 
 which for their habit chose out thee , 
 where beau ti 's veil doth cov er everi blot , 
 and all thing turn to fair , that eye can see ! 
 take heed ( dear heart ) of thi larg priv i leg , 
 the hard est knife il l-us doth lose hi edg . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 some say thi fault is youth , some wan ton , 
 some say thi grace is youth and gen tl sport , 
 both grace and fault are love of more and less : 
 thou mak'st fault grace , that to thee re sort : 
 as on the fin ger of a throne queen , 
 the basest jew el will be well es teem : 
 so are those er ror that in thee are seen , 
 to truth trans lat , and for true thing deem . 
 how mani lamb might the stern wolf be tray , 
 if like a lamb he could hi look trans lat ! 
 how mani gaz er mightst thou lead away , 
 if thou wouldst use the strength of all thi state ! 
 but do not so , i love thee in such sort , 
 as thou be mine , mine is thi good re port . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 how like a win ter hath my ab senc been 
 from thee , the plea sur of the fleet year ! 
 what freez have i felt , what dark day seen ! 
 what old de cemb 's bare every wher ! 
 and yet thi time re mov wa sum mer 's time , 
 the teem au tumn big with rich in creas , 
 bear the wan ton bur den of the prime , 
 like wid ow womb af ter their lord ' de ceas : 
 yet thi abund issu seem to me 
 but hope of or phan , and un fath fruit , 
 for sum mer and hi plea sur wait on thee , 
 and thou away , the veri bird are mute . 
 or if they sing , 't is with so dull a cheer , 
 that leav look pale , dread the win ter 's near . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 from you have i been ab sent in the spring , 
 when proud-pi april ( dress in all hi trim ) 
 hath put a spir it of youth in everi thing : 
 that heavi sat urn laugh and leap with him . 
 yet nor the lay of bird , nor the sweet smell 
 of dif fer flower in odour and in hue , 
 could make me ani sum mer 's stori tell : 
 or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew : 
 nor did i won der at the lili 's white , 
 nor prais the deep ver mil ion in the rose , 
 they were but sweet , but fig ur of de light : 
 drawn af ter you , you pat tern of all those . 
 yet seem it win ter still , and you away , 
 as with your shad ow i with these did play . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 the for ward vi o let thu did i chide , 
 sweet thief , whenc didst thou steal thi sweet that smell , 
 if not from my love 's breath ? the pur pl pride 
 which on thi soft check for com plex ion dwell , 
 in my love 's vein thou hast too grossli dy . 
 the lili i con demn for thi hand , 
 and bud of mar jo ram had stol'n thi hair , 
 the rose fear on thorn did stand , 
 one blush shame , an oth white de spair : 
 a third nor red , nor white , had stol'n of both , 
 and to hi rob beri had an nex thi breath , 
 but for hi theft in pride of all hi growth 
 a veng canker eat him up to death . 
 more flower i note , yet i none could see , 
 but sweet , or colour it had stol'n from thee . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 where art thou muse that thou for get'st so long , 
 to speak of that which give thee all thi might ? 
 spend'st thou thi furi on some worth less song , 
 dark en thi pow er to lend base sub ject light ? 
 re turn for get muse , and straight re deem , 
 in gen tl num ber time so idli spent , 
 sing to the ear that doth thi lay es teem , 
 and give thi pen both skill and ar gu ment . 
 rise resti muse , my love 's sweet face sur vey , 
 if time have ani wrin kl graven there , 
 if ani , be a satir to de cay , 
 and make time 's spoil de spis every wher . 
 give my love fame faster than time wast life , 
 so thou pre ven t'st hi scyth , and crook knife . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o tru ant muse what shall be thi amend , 
 for thi ne glect of truth in beau ti dy ? 
 both truth and beau ti on my love de pend : 
 so dost thou too , and there in dig nifi : 
 make an swer muse , wilt thou not hap li say , 
 'truth need no colour with hi colour fix , 
 beau ti no pen cil , beau ti 's truth to lay : 
 but best is best , if nev er in ter mix ' ? 
 be caus he need no prais , wilt thou be dumb ? 
 ex cus not si lenc so , for't lie in thee , 
 to make him much out liv a gild tomb : 
 and to be prais of age yet to be . 
 then do thi off ic muse , i teach thee how , 
 to make him seem long henc , as he show now . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 my love is strength en though more weak in seem , 
 i love not less , though less the show ap pear , 
 that love is mer c hand , whose rich es teem , 
 the own er 's tongu doth pub lish everi where . 
 our love wa new , and then but in the spring , 
 when i wa wont to greet it with my lay , 
 as philomel in sum mer 's front doth sing , 
 and stop her pipe in growth of riper day : 
 not that the sum mer is less pleas ant now 
 than when her mourn hymn did hush the night , 
 but that wild mu sic bur then everi bough , 
 and sweet grown com mon lose their dear de light . 
 there for like her , i some tim hold my tongu : 
 be caus i would not dull you with my song . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 alack what pover ti my muse bring forth , 
 that have such a scope to show her pride , 
 the ar gu ment all bare is of more worth 
 than when it hath my ad prais besid . 
 o blame me not if i no more can write ! 
 look in your glass and there ap pear a face , 
 that over- go my blunt in vent quit , 
 dull my line , and do me dis grac . 
 were it not sin then strive to mend , 
 to mar the sub ject that be for wa well ? 
 for to no oth er pass my vers tend , 
 than of your grace and your gift to tell . 
 and more , much more than in my vers can sit , 
 your own glass show you , when you look in it . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 to me fair friend you nev er can be old , 
 for as you were when first your eye i eye , 
 such seem your beau ti still : three win ter cold , 
 have from the for est shook three sum mer ' pride , 
 three beau teou spring to yel low au tumn turn , 
 in process of the sea son have i seen , 
 three april per fum in three hot june burn , 
 sinc first i saw you fresh which yet are green . 
 ah yet doth beau ti like a dial hand , 
 steal from hi fig ur , and no pace per ceiv , 
 so your sweet hue , which me think still doth stand 
 hath mo tion , and mine eye may be de ceiv . 
 for fear of which , hear thi thou age unbr , 
 ere you were born wa beau ti 's sum mer dead . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 let not my love be call idol a tri , 
 nor my belov as an idol show , 
 sinc all alik my song and prais be 
 to one , of one , still such , and ever so . 
 kind is my love to- day , to- mor row kind , 
 still con stant in a won drou ex cel , 
 there for my vers to con stanc con fin , 
 one thing ex press , leav out dif fer . 
 fair , kind , and true , is all my ar gu ment , 
 fair , kind , and true , vari to oth er word , 
 and in thi chang is my in vent spent , 
 three theme in one , which won drou scope af ford . 
 fair , kind , and true , have of ten live alon . 
 which three till now , nev er kept seat in one . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 when in the chron i cl of wast time , 
 i see de script of the fairest wight , 
 and beau ti make beau ti old rhyme , 
 in prais of ladi dead , and love knight , 
 then in the bla zon of sweet beau ti 's best , 
 of hand , of foot , of lip , of eye , of brow , 
 i see their an tiqu pen would have ex press , 
 even such a beau ti as you mas ter now . 
 so all their prais are but prophe ci 
 of thi our time , all you pre fig ur , 
 and for they look but with di vin eye , 
 they had not skill enough your worth to sing : 
 for we which now be hold these present day , 
 have eye to won der , but lack tongu to prais . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 not mine own fear , nor the prophet soul , 
 of the wide world , dream on thing to come , 
 can yet the leas of my true love con trol , 
 sup pos as for feit to a con fin doom . 
 the mor tal moon hath her eclips en dur , 
 and the sad au gur mock their own pre sag , 
 in cer tain ti now crown them selv as sur , 
 and peac pro claim oliv of end less age . 
 now with the drop of thi most bal mi time , 
 my love look fresh , and death to me sub scrib , 
 sinc spite of him i 'll live in thi poor rhyme , 
 while he in sult o'er dull and speech less tribe . 
 and thou in thi shalt find thi mon u ment , 
 when tyrant ' crest and tomb of brass are spent . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 what 's in the brain that ink may char act , 
 which hath not fig ur to thee my true spir it , 
 what 's new to speak , what now to reg ist , 
 that may ex press my love , or thi dear mer it ? 
 noth sweet boy , but yet like prayer di vin , 
 i must each day say o'er the veri same , 
 count no old thing old , thou mine , i thine , 
 even as when first i hal low thi fair name . 
 so that etern love in love 's fresh case , 
 weigh not the dust and in juri of age , 
 nor give to nec es sari wrin kl place , 
 but make an tiqu for aye hi page , 
 find the first con ceit of love there bred , 
 where time and out ward form would show it dead . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o nev er say that i wa fals of heart , 
 though ab senc seem my flame to qual i fi , 
 as easi might i from my self de part , 
 as from my soul which in thi breast doth lie : 
 that is my home of love , if i have rang , 
 like him that trav el i re turn again , 
 just to the time , not with the time ex chang , 
 so that my self bring wa ter for my stain , 
 nev er be liev though in my natur reign , 
 all frailti that be sieg all kind of blood , 
 that it could so pre poster be stain , 
 to leav for noth all thi sum of good : 
 for noth thi wide univers i call , 
 save thou my rose , in it thou art my all . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 ala 't is true , i have gone here and there , 
 and made my self a mot ley to the view , 
 gore mine own thought , sold cheap what is most dear , 
 made old of fenc of af fect new . 
 most true it is , that i have look on truth 
 askanc and strang : but by all abov , 
 these blench gave my heart an oth youth , 
 and wors es say prove thee my best of love . 
 now all is done , have what shall have no end , 
 mine ap petit i nev er more will grind 
 on new er proof , to tri an old er friend , 
 a god in love , to whom i am con fin . 
 then give me wel com , next my heav en the best , 
 even to thi pure and most most love breast . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 o for my sake do you with for tun chide , 
 the guilti god dess of my harm deed , 
 that did not bet ter for my life provid , 
 than pub lic mean which pub lic man ner breed . 
 thenc come it that my name re ceiv a brand , 
 and al most thenc my natur is sub du 
 to what it work in , like the dyer 's hand : 
 piti me then , and wish i were re new , 
 whilst like a will pa tient i will drink , 
 po tion of eisel 'gainst my strong in fect , 
 no bit ter that i will bit ter think , 
 nor dou bl penanc to cor rect cor rect . 
 piti me then dear friend , and i as sur ye , 
 even that your piti is enough to cure me . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 your love and piti doth th ' im press fill , 
 which vul gar scan dal stamp upon my brow , 
 for what care i who call me well or ill , 
 so you o'er- green my bad , my good al low ? 
 you are my all the world , and i must strive , 
 to know my shame and prais from your tongu , 
 none els to me , nor i to none aliv , 
 that my steel sens or chang right or wrong . 
 in so pro found abysm i throw all care 
 of oth er ' voic , that my adder 's sens , 
 to crit ic and to flat ter stop are : 
 mark how with my ne glect i do dis pens . 
 you are so strongli in my pur pos bred , 
 that all the world besid me think are dead . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 sinc i left you , mine eye is in my mind , 
 and that which gov ern me to go about , 
 doth part hi func tion , and is partli blind , 
 seem see , but ef fec tu is out : 
 for it no form de liv to the heart 
 of bird , of flower , or shape which it doth latch , 
 of hi quick ob ject hath the mind no part , 
 nor hi own vi sion hold what it doth catch : 
 for if it see the rud'st or gen tlest sight , 
 the most sweet favour or de formed'st crea tur , 
 the moun tain , or the sea , the day , or night : 
 the crow , or dove , it shape them to your fea tur . 
 in cap of more , re plet with you , 
 my most true mind thu maketh mine un tru . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 or whether doth my mind be crown with you 
 drink up the monarch 's plagu thi flat teri ? 
 or whether shall i say mine eye saith true , 
 and that your love taught it thi al che mi ? 
 to make of mon ster , and thing in di gest , 
 such cheru bin as your sweet self re sem bl , 
 cre at everi bad a per fect best 
 as fast as ob ject to hi beam as sem bl : 
 o 't is the first , 't is flat teri in my see , 
 and my great mind most kingli drink it up , 
 mine eye well know what with hi gust is 'gree , 
 and to hi palat doth prepar the cup . 
 if it be poi son , 't is the less er sin , 
 that mine eye love it and doth first be gin . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 those line that i be for have writ do lie , 
 even those that said i could not love you dear er , 
 yet then my judg ment knew no rea son whi , 
 my most full flame should af ter ward burn clear er , 
 but reck on time , whose mil lion ac cid 
 creep in 'twixt vow , and chang de cre of king , 
 tan sacr beau ti , blunt the sharp'st in tent , 
 di vert strong mind to the cours of al t'r thing : 
 ala whi fear of time 's tyran ni , 
 might i not then say 'now i love you best , ' 
 when i wa cer tain o'er in cer tain ti , 
 crown the present , doubt of the rest ? 
 love is a babe , then might i not say so 
 to give full growth to that which still doth grow . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 let me not to the mar riag of true mind 
 ad mit im pe di , love is not love 
 which al ter when it al ter find , 
 or bend with the re mov to re mov . 
 o no , it is an ever- fix mark 
 that look on tem pest and is nev er shak en ; 
 it is the star to everi wand'r bark , 
 whose worth 's un known , al though hi height be tak en . 
 love 's not time 's fool , though rosi lip and cheek 
 with in hi bend sickl 's com pass come , 
 love al ter not with hi brief hour and week , 
 but bear it out even to the edg of doom : 
 if thi be er ror and upon me prove , 
 i nev er writ , nor no man ever love . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 ac cus me thu , that i have scant all , 
 where in i should your great desert re pay , 
 for got upon your dear est love to call , 
 where to all bond do tie me day by day , 
 that i have fre quent been with un known mind , 
 and giv en to time your own dear-pur chas right , 
 that i have hoist sail to all the wind 
 which should trans port me far thest from your sight . 
 book both my wil and er ror down , 
 and on just proof sur mis , ac cu mul , 
 bring me with in the lev el of your frown , 
 but shoot not at me in your wak en hate : 
 sinc my ap peal say i did strive to prove 
 the con stanc and vir tu of your love . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 like as to make our ap petit more keen 
 with ea ger com pound we our palat urg , 
 as to pre vent our mal a di un seen , 
 we sick en to shun sick when we purg . 
 even so be full of your ne'er- cloy sweet , 
 to bit ter sauc did i frame my feed ; 
 and sick of wel far found a kind of meet , 
 to be dis eas ere that there wa true need . 
 thu poli ci in love t ' an ticip 
 the ill that were not , grew to fault as sur , 
 and brought to med i cin a health state 
 which rank of good would by ill be cure . 
 but thenc i learn and find the les son true , 
 drug poi son him that so feil sick of you . 
 
 
 
 
 
 <GO> 
 
 all well that end well 
 
 < stop >