
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 theseu , duke of athen 
 egeu , father to hermia 
 lysand , in love with hermia 
 demetriu , in love with hermia 
 philostr , master of the revel to theseu 
 quinc , a carpent 
 snug , a joiner 
 bottom , a weaver 
 flute , a bellows-mend 
 snout , a tinker 
 starvel , a tailor 
 
 hippolyta , queen of the amazon , bethroth to theseu 
 hermia , daughter to egeu , in love with lysand 
 helena , in love with demetriu 
 
 oberon , king of the fairi 
 titania , queen of the fairi 
 puck , or robin goodfellow 
 peaseblossom , fairi 
 cobweb , fairi 
 moth , fairi 
 mustardse , fairi 
 
 prologu , pyramu , thisbi , wall , moonshin , lion are present by : 
 quinc , bottom , flute , snout , starvel , and snug 
 
 other fairi attend their king and queen 
 attend on theseu and hippolyta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 athen and a wood near it 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 athen . the palac of theseu 
 
 enter theseu , hippolyta , philostr , and attend 
 
 theseu . now , fair hippolyta , our nuptial hour 
 draw on apac ; four happi day bring in 
 anoth moon ; but , o , methink , how slow 
 thi old moon wane ! she linger my desir , 
 like to a step-dam or a dowag , 
 long wither out a young man 's revenu . 
 hippolyta . four day will quickli steep themselv in night ; 
 four night will quickli dream away the time ; 
 and then the moon , like to a silver bow 
 new-bent in heaven , shall behold the night 
 of our solemn . 
 theseu . go , philostr , 
 stir up the athenian youth to merriment ; 
 awak the pert and nimbl spirit of mirth ; 
 turn melancholi forth to funer ; 
 the pale companion is not for our pomp . exit philostr 
 hippolyta , i woo 'd thee with my sword , 
 and won thi love do thee injuri ; 
 but i will wed thee in anoth key , 
 with pomp , with triumph , and with revel . 
 
 enter egeu , and hi daughter hermia , lysand , 
 and demetriu 
 
 egeu . happi be theseu , our renown duke ! 
 theseu . thank , good egeu ; what 's the news with thee ? 
 egeu . full of vexat come i , with complaint 
 against my child , my daughter hermia . 
 stand forth , demetriu . my nobl lord , 
 thi man hath my consent to marri her . 
 stand forth , lysand . and , my graciou duke , 
 thi man hath bewitch 'd the bosom of my child . 
 thou , thou , lysand , thou hast given her rhyme , 
 and interchang 'd love-token with my child ; 
 thou hast by moonlight at her window sung , 
 with feign voic , vers of feign love , 
 and stol'n the impress of her fantasi 
 with bracelet of thi hair , ring , gawd , conceit , 
 knack , trifl , nosegay , sweetmeats- messeng 
 of strong prevail in unharden youth ; 
 with cun hast thou filch 'd my daughter 's heart ; 
 turn 'd her obedi , which is due to me , 
 to stubborn harsh . and , my graciou duke , 
 be it so she will not here befor your grace 
 consent to marri with demetriu , 
 i beg the ancient privileg of athen : 
 as she is mine i may dispos of her ; 
 which shall be either to thi gentleman 
 or to her death , accord to our law 
 immedi provid in that case . 
 theseu . what say you , hermia ? be advi 'd , fair maid . 
 to you your father should be as a god ; 
 one that compo 'd your beauti ; yea , and one 
 to whom you are but as a form in wax , 
 by him imprint , and within hi power 
 to leav the figur , or disfigur it . 
 demetriu is a worthi gentleman . 
 hermia . so is lysand . 
 theseu . in himself he is ; 
 but , in thi kind , want your father 's voic , 
 the other must be held the worthier . 
 hermia . i would my father look 'd but with my eye . 
 theseu . rather your eye must with hi judgment look . 
 hermia . i do entreat your grace to pardon me . 
 i know not by what power i am made bold , 
 nor how it may concern my modesti 
 in such a presenc here to plead my thought ; 
 but i beseech your grace that i may know 
 the worst that may befal me in thi case , 
 if i refus to wed demetriu . 
 theseu . either to die the death , or to abjur 
 for ever the societi of men . 
 therefor , fair hermia , question your desir , 
 know of your youth , examin well your blood , 
 whether , if you yield not to your father 's choic , 
 you can endur the liveri of a nun , 
 for aye to be shadi cloister mew 'd , 
 to live a barren sister all your life , 
 chant faint hymn to the cold fruitless moon . 
 thrice-bless they that master so their blood 
 to undergo such maiden pilgrimag ; 
 but earthlier happi is the rose distil 'd 
 than that which wither on the virgin thorn 
 grow , live , and die , in singl blessed . 
 hermia . so will i grow , so live , so die , my lord , 
 ere i will yield my virgin patent up 
 unto hi lordship , whose unwish yoke 
 my soul consent not to give sovereignti . 
 theseu . take time to paus ; and by the next new moon- 
 the sealing-day betwixt my love and me 
 for everlast bond of fellowship- 
 upon that day either prepar to die 
 for disobedi to your father 's will , 
 or els to wed demetriu , as he would , 
 or on diana 's altar to protest 
 for aye auster and singl life . 
 demetriu . relent , sweet hermia ; and , lysand , yield 
 thi craze titl to my certain right . 
 lysand . you have her father 's love , demetriu ; 
 let me have hermia 's ; do you marri him . 
 egeu . scorn lysand , true , he hath my love ; 
 and what is mine my love shall render him ; 
 and she is mine ; and all my right of her 
 i do estat unto demetriu . 
 lysand . i am , my lord , as well deriv 'd as he , 
 as well possess 'd ; my love is more than hi ; 
 my fortun everi way as fairli rank 'd , 
 if not with vantag , as demetriu ' ; 
 and , which is more than all these boast can be , 
 i am belov 'd of beauteou hermia . 
 whi should not i then prosecut my right ? 
 demetriu , i 'll avouch it to hi head , 
 made love to nedar 's daughter , helena , 
 and won her soul ; and she , sweet ladi , dote , 
 devoutli dote , dote in idolatri , 
 upon thi spot and inconst man . 
 theseu . i must confess that i have heard so much , 
 and with demetriu thought to have spoke thereof ; 
 but , be over-ful of self-affair , 
 my mind did lose it . but , demetriu , come ; 
 and come , egeu ; you shall go with me ; 
 i have some privat school for you both . 
 for you , fair hermia , look you arm yourself 
 to fit your fanci to your father 's will , 
 or els the law of athen yield you up- 
 which by no mean we may extenuate- 
 to death , or to a vow of singl life . 
 come , my hippolyta ; what cheer , my love ? 
 demetriu , and egeu , go along ; 
 i must employ you in some busi 
 against our nuptial , and confer with you 
 of someth nearli that concern yourselv . 
 egeu . with duti and desir we follow you . 
 exeunt all but lysand and hermia 
 lysand . how now , my love ! whi is your cheek so pale ? 
 how chanc the rose there do fade so fast ? 
 hermia . belik for want of rain , which i could well 
 beteem them from the tempest of my eye . 
 lysand . ay me ! for aught that i could ever read , 
 could ever hear by tale or histori , 
 the cours of true love never did run smooth ; 
 but either it wa differ in blood- 
 hermia . o cross ! too high to be enthral 'd to low . 
 lysand . or els misgraf in respect of years- 
 hermia . o spite ! too old to be engag 'd to young . 
 lysand . or els it stood upon the choic of friends- 
 hermia . o hell ! to choos love by anoth 's eye . 
 lysand . or , if there were a sympathi in choic , 
 war , death , or sick , did lay sieg to it , 
 make it momentari as a sound , 
 swift as a shadow , short as ani dream , 
 brief as the lightn in the colli night 
 that , in a spleen , unfold both heaven and earth , 
 and ere a man hath power to say 'behold ! ' 
 the jaw of dark do devour it up ; 
 so quick bright thing come to confus . 
 hermia . if then true lover have ever cross 'd , 
 it stand as an edict in destini . 
 then let us teach our trial patienc , 
 becaus it is a customari cross , 
 as due to love as thought and dream and sigh , 
 wish and tear , poor fanci 's follow . 
 lysand . a good persuas ; therefor , hear me , hermia . 
 i have a widow aunt , a dowag 
 of great revenu , and she hath no child- 
 from athen is her hous remot seven leagues- 
 and she respect me as her onli son . 
 there , gentl hermia , may i marri thee ; 
 and to that place the sharp athenian law 
 can not pursu us . if thou lovest me then , 
 steal forth thi father 's hous to-morrow night ; 
 and in the wood , a leagu without the town , 
 where i did meet thee onc with helena 
 to do observ to a morn of may , 
 there will i stay for thee . 
 hermia . my good lysand ! 
 i swear to thee by cupid 's strongest bow , 
 by hi best arrow , with the golden head , 
 by the simplic of venu ' dove , 
 by that which knitteth soul and prosper love , 
 and by that fire which burn 'd the carthag queen , 
 when the fals troyan under sail wa seen , 
 by all the vow that ever men have broke , 
 in number more than ever women spoke , 
 in that same place thou hast appoint me , 
 to-morrow truli will i meet with thee . 
 lysand . keep promis , love . look , here come helena . 
 
 enter helena 
 
 hermia . god speed fair helena ! whither away ? 
 helena . call you me fair ? that fair again unsay . 
 demetriu love your fair . o happi fair ! 
 your eye are lode-star and your tongu 's sweet air 
 more tuneabl than lark to shepherd 's ear , 
 when wheat is green , when hawthorn bud appear . 
 sick is catch ; o , were favour so , 
 your would i catch , fair hermia , ere i go ! 
 my ear should catch your voic , my eye your eye , 
 my tongu should catch your tongu 's sweet melodi . 
 were the world mine , demetriu be bate , 
 the rest i 'd give to be to you translat . 
 o , teach me how you look , and with what art 
 you sway the motion of demetriu ' heart ! 
 hermia . i frown upon him , yet he love me still . 
 helena . o that your frown would teach my smile such skill ! 
 hermia . i give him curs , yet he give me love . 
 helena . o that my prayer could such affect move ! 
 hermia . the more i hate , the more he follow me . 
 helena . the more i love , the more he hateth me . 
 hermia . hi folli , helena , is no fault of mine . 
 helena . none , but your beauti ; would that fault were mine ! 
 hermia . take comfort : he no more shall see my face ; 
 lysand and myself will fli thi place . 
 befor the time i did lysand see , 
 seem 'd athen as a paradis to me . 
 o , then , what grace in my love do dwell , 
 that he hath turn 'd a heaven unto a hell ! 
 lysand . helen , to you our mind we will unfold : 
 to-morrow night , when phoeb doth behold 
 her silver visag in the wat'ri glass , 
 deck with liquid pearl the blade grass , 
 a time that lover ' flight doth still conceal , 
 through athen ' gate have we devi 'd to steal . 
 hermia . and in the wood where often you and i 
 upon faint primros bed were wont to lie , 
 empti our bosom of their counsel sweet , 
 there my lysand and myself shall meet ; 
 and thenc from athen turn away our eye , 
 to seek new friend and stranger compani . 
 farewel , sweet playfellow ; pray thou for us , 
 and good luck grant thee thi demetriu ! 
 keep word , lysand ; we must starv our sight 
 from lover ' food till morrow deep midnight . 
 lysand . i will , my hermia . [ exit hermia ] helena , adieu ; 
 as you on him , demetriu dote on you . exit 
 helena . how happi some o'er other some can be ! 
 through athen i am thought as fair as she . 
 but what of that ? demetriu think not so ; 
 he will not know what all but he do know . 
 and as he err , dote on hermia 's eye , 
 so i , admir of hi qualiti . 
 thing base and vile , hold no quantiti , 
 love can transpos to form and digniti . 
 love look not with the eye , but with the mind ; 
 and therefor is wing 'd cupid paint blind . 
 nor hath love 's mind of ani judgment tast ; 
 wing and no eye figur unheedi hast ; 
 and therefor is love said to be a child , 
 becaus in choic he is so oft beguil 'd . 
 as waggish boy in game themselv forswear , 
 so the boy love is perjur 'd everywher ; 
 for ere demetriu look 'd on hermia 's eyn , 
 he hail 'd down oath that he wa onli mine ; 
 and when thi hail some heat from hermia felt , 
 so he dissolv 'd , and show'r of oath did melt . 
 i will go tell him of fair hermia 's flight ; 
 then to the wood will he to-morrow night 
 pursu her ; and for thi intellig 
 if i have thank , it is a dear expens . 
 but herein mean i to enrich my pain , 
 to have hi sight thither and back again . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 athen . quinc 's hous 
 
 enter quinc , snug , bottom flute , snout , and starvel 
 
 quinc . is all our compani here ? 
 bottom . you were best to call them gener , man by man , accord 
 to the scrip . 
 quinc . here is the scroll of everi man 's name which is thought 
 fit , through all athen , to play in our interlud befor the duke 
 and the duchess on hi wedding-day at night . 
 bottom . first , good peter quinc , say what the play treat on ; then 
 read the name of the actor ; and so grow to a point . 
 quinc . marri , our play is 'the most lament comedi and most 
 cruel death of pyramu and thisbi . ' 
 bottom . a veri good piec of work , i assur you , and a merri . now , 
 good peter quinc , call forth your actor by the scroll . master , 
 spread yourselv . 
 quinc . answer , as i call you . nick bottom , the weaver . 
 bottom . readi . name what part i am for , and proceed . 
 quinc . you , nick bottom , are set down for pyramu . 
 bottom . what is pyramu ? a lover , or a tyrant ? 
 quinc . a lover , that kill himself most gallant for love . 
 bottom . that will ask some tear in the true perform of it . if i 
 do it , let the audienc look to their eye ; i will move storm ; i 
 will condol in some measur . to the rest- yet my chief humour is 
 for a tyrant . i could play ercl rare , or a part to tear a cat 
 in , to make all split . 
 
 'the rage rock 
 and shiver shock 
 shall break the lock 
 of prison gate ; 
 
 and phibbu ' car 
 shall shine from far , 
 and make and mar 
 the foolish fate . ' 
 
 thi wa lofti . now name the rest of the player . thi is 
 ercl ' vein , a tyrant 's vein : a lover is more condol . 
 quinc . franci flute , the bellows-mend . 
 flute . here , peter quinc . 
 quinc . flute , you must take thisbi on you . 
 flute . what is thisbi ? a wand'r knight ? 
 quinc . it is the ladi that pyramu must love . 
 flute . nay , faith , let not me play a woman ; i have a beard come . 
 quinc . that 's all one ; you shall play it in a mask , and you may 
 speak as small as you will . 
 bottom . an i may hide my face , let me play thisbi too . 
 i 'll speak in a monstrou littl voic : 'thisn , thisn ! ' 
 [ then speak small ] 'ah pyramu , my lover dear ! thi 
 thisbi dear , and ladi dear ! ' 
 quinc . no , no , you must play pyramu ; and , flute , you thisbi . 
 bottom . well , proceed . 
 quinc . robin starvel , the tailor . 
 starvel . here , peter quinc . 
 quinc . robin starvel , you must play thisbi 's mother . 
 tom snout , the tinker . 
 snout . here , peter quinc . 
 quinc . you , pyramu ' father ; myself , thisbi 's father ; snug , the 
 joiner , you , the lion 's part . and , i hope , here is a play fit . 
 snug . have you the lion 's part written ? pray you , if it be , give it 
 me , for i am slow of studi . 
 quinc . you may do it extempor , for it is noth but roar . 
 bottom . let me play the lion too . i will roar that i will do ani 
 man 's heart good to hear me ; i will roar that i will make the 
 duke say 'let him roar again , let him roar again . ' 
 quinc . an you should do it too terribl , you would fright the 
 duchess and the ladi , that they would shriek ; and that were 
 enough to hang us all . 
 all . that would hang us , everi mother 's son . 
 bottom . i grant you , friend , if you should fright the ladi out 
 of their wit , they would have no more discret but to hang us ; 
 but i will aggrav my voic so , that i will roar you as gentli 
 as ani suck dove ; i will roar you an 'twere ani nightingal . 
 quinc . you can play no part but pyramu ; for pyramu is a 
 sweet-fac 'd man ; a proper man , as one shall see in a summer 's 
 day ; a most love gentleman-lik man ; therefor you must need 
 play pyramu . 
 bottom . well , i will undertak it . what beard were i best to play 
 it in ? 
 quinc . whi , what you will . 
 bottom . i will discharg it in either your straw-colour beard , your 
 orange-tawni beard , your purple-in-grain beard , or your 
 french-crown-colour beard , your perfect yellow . 
 quinc . some of your french crown have no hair at all , and then 
 you will play bare-fac 'd . but , master , here are your part ; and 
 i am to entreat you , request you , and desir you , to con them by 
 to-morrow night ; and meet me in the palac wood , a mile without 
 the town , by moonlight ; there will we rehears ; for if we meet in 
 the citi , we shall be dogg 'd with compani , and our devic known . 
 in the meantim i will draw a bill of properti , such as our 
 play want . i pray you , fail me not . 
 bottom . we will meet ; and there we may rehears most obscen and 
 courag . take pain ; be perfect ; adieu . 
 quinc . at the duke 's oak we meet . 
 bottom . enough ; hold , or cut bow-str . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 a wood near athen 
 
 enter a fairi at one door , and puck at anoth 
 
 puck . how now , spirit ! whither wander you ? 
 fairi . over hill , over dale , 
 thorough bush , thorough brier , 
 over park , over pale , 
 thorough flood , thorough fire , 
 i do wander everi where , 
 swifter than the moon 's sphere ; 
 and i serv the fairi queen , 
 to dew her orb upon the green . 
 the cowslip tall her pension be ; 
 in their gold coat spot you see ; 
 those be rubi , fairi favour , 
 in those freckl live their savour . 
 
 i must go seek some dewdrop here , 
 and hang a pearl in everi cowslip 's ear . 
 farewel , thou lob of spirit ; i 'll be gone . 
 our queen and all her elv come here anon . 
 puck . the king doth keep hi revel here to-night ; 
 take heed the queen come not within hi sight ; 
 for oberon is pass fell and wrath , 
 becaus that she as her attend hath 
 a love boy , stolen from an indian king . 
 she never had so sweet a changel ; 
 and jealou oberon would have the child 
 knight of hi train , to trace the forest wild ; 
 but she perforc withhold the love boy , 
 crown him with flower , and make him all her joy . 
 and now they never meet in grove or green , 
 by fountain clear , or spangl starlight sheen , 
 but they do squar , that all their elv for fear 
 creep into acorn cup and hide them there . 
 fairi . either i mistak your shape and make quit , 
 or els you are that shrewd and knavish sprite 
 call 'd robin goodfellow . are not you he 
 that fright the maiden of the villageri , 
 skim milk , and sometim labour in the quern , 
 and bootless make the breathless housewif churn , 
 and sometim make the drink to bear no barm , 
 mislead night-wander , laugh at their harm ? 
 those that hobgoblin call you , and sweet puck , 
 you do their work , and they shall have good luck . 
 are not you he ? 
 puck . thou speakest aright : 
 i am that merri wander of the night . 
 i jest to oberon , and make him smile 
 when i a fat and bean-f hors beguil , 
 neigh in like of a filli foal ; 
 and sometim lurk i in a gossip 's bowl 
 in veri like of a roast crab , 
 and , when she drink , against her lip i bob , 
 and on her wither dewlap pour the ale . 
 the wisest aunt , tell the saddest tale , 
 sometim for three-foot stool mistaketh me ; 
 then slip i from her bum , down toppl she , 
 and 'tailor ' cri , and fall into a cough ; 
 and then the whole quir hold their hip and laugh , 
 and waxen in their mirth , and neez , and swear 
 a merrier hour wa never wast there . 
 but room , fairi , here come oberon . 
 fairi . and here my mistress . would that he were gone ! 
 
 enter oberon at one door , with hi train , and titania , 
 at anoth , with her 
 
 oberon . ill met by moonlight , proud titania . 
 titania . what , jealou oberon ! fairi , skip henc ; 
 i have forsworn hi bed and compani . 
 oberon . tarri , rash wanton ; am not i thi lord ? 
 titania . then i must be thi ladi ; but i know 
 when thou hast stolen away from fairi land , 
 and in the shape of corin sat all day , 
 play on pipe of corn , and vers love 
 to amor phillida . whi art thou here , 
 come from the farthest steep of india , 
 but that , forsooth , the bounc amazon , 
 your buskin 'd mistress and your warrior love , 
 to theseu must be wed , and you come 
 to give their bed joy and prosper ? 
 oberon . how canst thou thu , for shame , titania , 
 glanc at my credit with hippolyta , 
 know i know thi love to theseu ? 
 didst not thou lead him through the glimmer night 
 from perigouna , whom he ravish ? 
 and make him with fair aegl break hi faith , 
 with ariadn and antiopa ? 
 titania . these are the forgeri of jealousi ; 
 and never , sinc the middl summer 's spring , 
 met we on hill , in dale , forest , or mead , 
 by pave fountain , or by rushi brook , 
 or in the beach margent of the sea , 
 to danc our ringlet to the whistl wind , 
 but with thi brawl thou hast disturb 'd our sport . 
 therefor the wind , pipe to us in vain , 
 as in reveng , have suck 'd up from the sea 
 contagi fog ; which , fall in the land , 
 hath everi pelt river made so proud 
 that they have overborn their contin . 
 the ox hath therefor stretch 'd hi yoke in vain , 
 the ploughman lost hi sweat , and the green corn 
 hath rot ere hi youth attain 'd a beard ; 
 the fold stand empti in the drown field , 
 and crow are fat with the murrion flock ; 
 the nine men 's morri is fill 'd up with mud , 
 and the quaint maze in the wanton green , 
 for lack of tread , are undistinguish . 
 the human mortal want their winter here ; 
 no night is now with hymn or carol blest ; 
 therefor the moon , the gover of flood , 
 pale in her anger , wash all the air , 
 that rheumat diseas do abound . 
 and thorough thi distemperatur we see 
 the season alter : hoary-head frost 
 fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose ; 
 and on old hiem ' thin and ici crown 
 an odor chaplet of sweet summer bud 
 is , as in mockeri , set . the spring , the summer , 
 the child autumn , angri winter , chang 
 their wont liveri ; and the maze world , 
 by their increas , now know not which is which . 
 and thi same progeni of evil come 
 from our debat , from our dissens ; 
 we are their parent and origin . 
 oberon . do you amend it , then ; it lie in you . 
 whi should titania cross her oberon ? 
 i do but beg a littl changel boy 
 to be my henchman . 
 titania . set your heart at rest ; 
 the fairi land buy not the child of me . 
 hi mother wa a vot'ress of my order ; 
 and , in the spice indian air , by night , 
 full often hath she gossip 'd by my side ; 
 and sat with me on neptun 's yellow sand , 
 mark th ' embark trader on the flood ; 
 when we have laugh 'd to see the sail conceiv , 
 and grow big-belli with the wanton wind ; 
 which she , with pretti and with swim gait 
 following- her womb then rich with my young squire- 
 would imit , and sail upon the land , 
 to fetch me trifl , and return again , 
 as from a voyag , rich with merchandis . 
 but she , be mortal , of that boy did die ; 
 and for her sake do i rear up her boy ; 
 and for her sake i will not part with him . 
 oberon . how long within thi wood intend you stay ? 
 titania . perchanc till after theseu ' wedding-day . 
 if you will patient danc in our round , 
 and see our moonlight revel , go with us ; 
 if not , shun me , and i will spare your haunt . 
 oberon . give me that boy and i will go with thee . 
 titania . not for thi fairi kingdom . fairi , away . 
 we shall chide downright if i longer stay . 
 exit titania with her train 
 oberon . well , go thi way ; thou shalt not from thi grove 
 till i torment thee for thi injuri . 
 my gentl puck , come hither . thou rememb'rest 
 sinc onc i sat upon a promontori , 
 and heard a mermaid on a dolphin 's back 
 utter such dulcet and harmoni breath 
 that the rude sea grew civil at her song , 
 and certain star shot madli from their sphere 
 to hear the sea-maid 's music . 
 puck . i rememb . 
 oberon . that veri time i saw , but thou couldst not , 
 fli between the cold moon and the earth 
 cupid , all arm 'd ; a certain aim he took 
 at a fair vestal , throne by the west , 
 and loo 'd hi love-shaft smartli from hi bow , 
 as it should pierc a hundr thousand heart ; 
 but i might see young cupid 's fieri shaft 
 quench 'd in the chast beam of the wat'ri moon ; 
 and the imperi vot'ress pass on , 
 in maiden medit , fancy-fre . 
 yet mark 'd i where the bolt of cupid fell . 
 it fell upon a littl western flower , 
 befor milk-whit , now purpl with love 's wound , 
 and maiden call it love-in-idl . 
 fetch me that flow ' r , the herb i show thee onc . 
 the juic of it on sleep eyelid laid 
 will make or man or woman madli dote 
 upon the next live creatur that it see . 
 fetch me thi herb , and be thou here again 
 ere the leviathan can swim a leagu . 
 puck . i 'll put a girdl round about the earth 
 in forti minut . exit puck 
 oberon . have onc thi juic , 
 i 'll watch titania when she is asleep , 
 and drop the liquor of it in her eye ; 
 the next thing then she wake look upon , 
 be it on lion , bear , or wolf , or bull , 
 on meddl monkey , or on busi ape , 
 she shall pursu it with the soul of love . 
 and ere i take thi charm from off her sight , 
 as i can take it with anoth herb , 
 i 'll make her render up her page to me . 
 but who come here ? i am invis ; 
 and i will overhear their confer . 
 
 enter demetriu , helena follow him 
 
 demetriu . i love thee not , therefor pursu me not . 
 where is lysand and fair hermia ? 
 the one i 'll slay , the other slayeth me . 
 thou told'st me they were stol'n unto thi wood , 
 and here am i , and wood within thi wood , 
 becaus i can not meet my hermia . 
 henc , get thee gone , and follow me no more . 
 helena . you draw me , you hard-heart adam ; 
 but yet you draw not iron , for my heart 
 is true as steel . leav you your power to draw , 
 and i shall have no power to follow you . 
 demetriu . do i entic you ? do i speak you fair ? 
 or , rather , do i not in plainest truth 
 tell you i do not nor i can not love you ? 
 helena . and even for that do i love you the more . 
 i am your spaniel ; and , demetriu , 
 the more you beat me , i will fawn on you . 
 use me but as your spaniel , spurn me , strike me , 
 neglect me , lose me ; onli give me leav , 
 unworthi as i am , to follow you . 
 what worser place can i beg in your love , 
 and yet a place of high respect with me , 
 than to be use as you use your dog ? 
 demetriu . tempt not too much the hatr of my spirit ; 
 for i am sick when i do look on thee . 
 helena . and i am sick when i look not on you . 
 demetriu . you do impeach your modesti too much 
 to leav the citi and commit yourself 
 into the hand of one that love you not ; 
 to trust the opportun of night , 
 and the ill counsel of a desert place , 
 with the rich worth of your virgin . 
 helena . your virtu is my privileg for that : 
 it is not night when i do see your face , 
 therefor i think i am not in the night ; 
 nor doth thi wood lack world of compani , 
 for you , in my respect , are all the world . 
 then how can it be said i am alon 
 when all the world is here to look on me ? 
 demetriu . i 'll run from thee and hide me in the brake , 
 and leav thee to the merci of wild beast . 
 helena . the wildest hath not such a heart as you . 
 run when you will ; the stori shall be chang 'd : 
 apollo fli , and daphn hold the chase ; 
 the dove pursu the griffin ; the mild hind 
 make speed to catch the tiger- bootless speed , 
 when cowardic pursu and valour fli . 
 demetriu . i will not stay thi question ; let me go ; 
 or , if thou follow me , do not believ 
 but i shall do thee mischief in the wood . 
 helena . ay , in the templ , in the town , the field , 
 you do me mischief . fie , demetriu ! 
 your wrong do set a scandal on my sex . 
 we can not fight for love as men may do ; 
 we should be woo 'd , and were not made to woo . 
 exit demetriu 
 i 'll follow thee , and make a heaven of hell , 
 to die upon the hand i love so well . exit helena 
 oberon . fare thee well , nymph ; ere he do leav thi grove , 
 thou shalt fli him , and he shall seek thi love . 
 
 re-ent puck 
 
 hast thou the flower there ? welcom , wander . 
 puck . ay , there it is . 
 oberon . i pray thee give it me . 
 i know a bank where the wild thyme blow , 
 where oxlip and the nod violet grow , 
 quit over-canopi with lusciou woodbin , 
 with sweet musk-ros , and with eglantin ; 
 there sleep titania sometim of the night , 
 lull 'd in these flower with danc and delight ; 
 and there the snake throw her enamel 'd skin , 
 weed wide enough to wrap a fairi in ; 
 and with the juic of thi i 'll streak her eye , 
 and make her full of hate fantasi . 
 take thou some of it , and seek through thi grove : 
 a sweet athenian ladi is in love 
 with a disdain youth ; anoint hi eye ; 
 but do it when the next thing he espi 
 may be the ladi . thou shalt know the man 
 by the athenian garment he hath on . 
 effect it with some care , that he may prove 
 more fond on her than she upon her love . 
 and look thou meet me ere the first cock crow . 
 puck . fear not , my lord ; your servant shall do so . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 anoth part of the wood 
 
 enter titania , with her train 
 
 titania . come now , a roundel and a fairi song ; 
 then , for the third part of a minut , henc : 
 some to kill canker in the musk-ros bud ; 
 some war with rere-mic for their leathern wing , 
 to make my small elv coat ; and some keep back 
 the clamor owl that nightli hoot and wonder 
 at our quaint spirit . sing me now asleep ; 
 then to your offic , and let me rest . 
 
 the fairi sing 
 
 first fairi . you spot snake with doubl tongu , 
 thorni hedgehog , be not seen ; 
 newt and blind-worm , do no wrong , 
 come not near our fairi queen . 
 choru . philomel with melodi 
 sing in our sweet lullabi . 
 lulla , lulla , lullabi ; lulla , lulla , lullabi . 
 never harm 
 nor spell nor charm 
 come our love ladi nigh . 
 so good night , with lullabi . 
 second fairi . weav spider , come not here ; 
 henc , you long-legg 'd spinner , henc . 
 beetl black , approach not near ; 
 worm nor snail do no offenc . 
 choru . philomel with melodi , etc . [ titania sleep ] 
 first fairi . henc away ; now all is well . 
 one aloof stand sentinel . exeunt fairi 
 
 enter oberon and squeez the flower on titania 's eyelid 
 
 oberon . what thou seest when thou dost wake , 
 do it for thi true-lov take ; 
 love and languish for hi sake . 
 be it ounc , or cat , or bear , 
 pard , or boar with bristl hair , 
 in thi eye that shall appear 
 when thou wak'st , it is thi dear . 
 wake when some vile thing is near . exit 
 
 enter lysand and hermia 
 
 lysand . fair love , you faint with wand'r in the wood ; 
 and , to speak troth , i have forgot our way ; 
 we 'll rest us , hermia , if you think it good , 
 and tarri for the comfort of the day . 
 hermia . be it so , lysand : find you out a bed , 
 for i upon thi bank will rest my head . 
 lysand . one turf shall serv as pillow for us both ; 
 one heart , one bed , two bosom , and one troth . 
 hermia . nay , good lysand ; for my sake , my dear , 
 lie further off yet ; do not lie so near . 
 lysand . o , take the sens , sweet , of my innoc ! 
 love take the mean in love 's confer . 
 i mean that my heart unto your is knit , 
 so that but one heart we can make of it ; 
 two bosom interchain with an oath , 
 so then two bosom and a singl troth . 
 then by your side no bed-room me deni , 
 for lie so , hermia , i do not lie . 
 hermia . lysand riddl veri prettili . 
 now much beshrew my manner and my pride , 
 if hermia meant to say lysand lie ! 
 but , gentl friend , for love and courtesi 
 lie further off , in human modesti ; 
 such separ as may well be said 
 becom a virtuou bachelor and a maid , 
 so far be distant ; and good night , sweet friend . 
 thi love ne'er alter till thi sweet life end ! 
 lysand . amen , amen , to that fair prayer say i ; 
 and then end life when i end loyalti ! 
 here is my bed ; sleep give thee all hi rest ! 
 hermia . with half that wish the wisher 's eye be press 'd ! 
 [ they sleep ] 
 
 enter puck 
 
 puck . through the forest have i gone , 
 but athenian found i none 
 on whose eye i might approv 
 thi flower 's forc in stir love . 
 night and silence- who is here ? 
 weed of athen he doth wear : 
 thi is he , my master said , 
 despis the athenian maid ; 
 and here the maiden , sleep sound , 
 on the dank and dirti ground . 
 pretti soul ! she durst not lie 
 near thi lack-lov , thi kill-courtesi . 
 churl , upon thi eye i throw 
 all the power thi charm doth owe : 
 when thou wak'st let love forbid 
 sleep hi seat on thi eyelid . 
 so awak when i am gone ; 
 for i must now to oberon . exit 
 
 enter demetriu and helena , run 
 
 helena . stay , though thou kill me , sweet demetriu . 
 demetriu . i charg thee , henc , and do not haunt me thu . 
 helena . o , wilt thou darkl leav me ? do not so . 
 demetriu . stay on thi peril ; i alon will go . exit 
 helena . o , i am out of breath in thi fond chase ! 
 the more my prayer , the lesser is my grace . 
 happi is hermia , wheresoe' she lie , 
 for she hath bless and attract eye . 
 how came her eye so bright ? not with salt tear ; 
 if so , my eye are oft'ner wash 'd than her . 
 no , no , i am as ugli as a bear , 
 for beast that meet me run away for fear ; 
 therefor no marvel though demetriu 
 do , as a monster , fli my presenc thu . 
 what wick and dissembl glass of mine 
 made me compar with hermia 's spheri eyn ? 
 but who is here ? lysand ! on the ground ! 
 dead , or asleep ? i see no blood , no wound . 
 lysand , if you live , good sir , awak . 
 lysand . [ wake ] and run through fire i will for thi sweet sake . 
 transpar helena ! natur show art , 
 that through thi bosom make me see thi heart . 
 where is demetriu ? o , how fit a word 
 is that vile name to perish on my sword ! 
 helena . do not say so , lysand ; say not so . 
 what though he love your hermia ? lord , what though ? 
 yet hermia still love you ; then be content . 
 lysand . content with hermia ! no : i do repent 
 the tediou minut i with her have spent . 
 not hermia but helena i love : 
 who will not chang a raven for a dove ? 
 the will of man is by hi reason sway 'd , 
 and reason say you are the worthier maid . 
 thing grow are not ripe until their season ; 
 so i , be young , till now ripe not to reason ; 
 and touch now the point of human skill , 
 reason becom the marshal to my will , 
 and lead me to your eye , where i o'erlook 
 love 's stori , written in love 's richest book . 
 helena . wherefor wa i to thi keen mockeri born ? 
 when at your hand did i deserv thi scorn ? 
 is't not enough , is't not enough , young man , 
 that i did never , no , nor never can , 
 deserv a sweet look from demetriu ' eye , 
 but you must flout my insuffici ? 
 good troth , you do me wrong , good sooth , you do , 
 in such disdain manner me to woo . 
 but fare you well ; perforc i must confess 
 i thought you lord of more true gentl . 
 o , that a ladi of one man refu 'd 
 should of anoth therefor be abu 'd ! exit 
 lysand . she see not hermia . hermia , sleep thou there ; 
 and never mayst thou come lysand near ! 
 for , as a surfeit of the sweetest thing 
 the deepest loath to the stomach bring , 
 or as the heresi that men do leav 
 are hate most of those they did deceiv , 
 so thou , my surfeit and my heresi , 
 of all be hate , but the most of me ! 
 and , all my power , address your love and might 
 to honour helen , and to be her knight ! exit 
 hermia . [ start ] help me , lysand , help me ; do thi best 
 to pluck thi crawl serpent from my breast . 
 ay me , for piti ! what a dream wa here ! 
 lysand , look how i do quak with fear . 
 methought a serpent eat my heart away , 
 and you sat smile at hi cruel prey . 
 lysand ! what , remov 'd ? lysand ! lord ! 
 what , out of hear gone ? no sound , no word ? 
 alack , where are you ? speak , an if you hear ; 
 speak , of all love ! i swoon almost with fear . 
 no ? then i well perceiv you are not nigh . 
 either death or you i 'll find immedi . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 the wood . titania lie asleep 
 
 enter quinc , snug , bottom , flute , snout , and starvel 
 
 bottom . are we all met ? 
 quinc . pat , pat ; and here 's a marvel conveni place for our 
 rehears . thi green plot shall be our stage , thi hawthorn 
 brake our tiring-hous ; and we will do it in action , as we will 
 do it befor the duke . 
 bottom . peter quinc ! 
 quinc . what sayest thou , bulli bottom ? 
 bottom . there are thing in thi comedi of pyramu and thisbi that 
 will never pleas . first , pyramu must draw a sword to kill 
 himself ; which the ladi can not abid . how answer you that ? 
 snout . by ' r lakin , a parlou fear . 
 starvel . i believ we must leav the kill out , when all is 
 done . 
 bottom . not a whit ; i have a devic to make all well . write me a 
 prologu ; and let the prologu seem to say we will do no harm 
 with our sword , and that pyramu is not kill 'd inde ; and for 
 the more better assur , tell them that i pyramu am not 
 pyramu but bottom the weaver . thi will put them out of fear . 
 quinc . well , we will have such a prologu ; and it shall be written 
 in eight and six . 
 bottom . no , make it two more ; let it be written in eight and eight . 
 snout . will not the ladi be afeard of the lion ? 
 starvel . i fear it , i promis you . 
 bottom . master , you ought to consid with yourself to bring in- 
 god shield us ! - a lion among ladi is a most dread thing ; for 
 there is not a more fear wild-fowl than your lion live ; and 
 we ought to look to't . 
 snout . therefor anoth prologu must tell he is not a lion . 
 bottom . nay , you must name hi name , and half hi face must be seen 
 through the lion 's neck ; and he himself must speak through , 
 say thu , or to the same defect : 'ladi , ' or 'fair ladi , i 
 would wish you ' or ' i would request you ' or ' i would entreat you 
 not to fear , not to trembl . my life for your ! if you think i 
 come hither as a lion , it were piti of my life . no , i am no such 
 thing ; i am a man as other men are . ' and there , inde , let him 
 name hi name , and tell them plainli he is snug the joiner . 
 quinc . well , it shall be so . but there is two hard things- that 
 is , to bring the moonlight into a chamber ; for , you know , pyramu 
 and thisbi meet by moonlight . 
 snout . doth the moon shine that night we play our play ? 
 bottom . a calendar , a calendar ! look in the almanack ; find out 
 moonshin , find out moonshin . 
 quinc . ye , it doth shine that night . 
 bottom . whi , then may you leav a casement of the great chamber 
 window , where we play , open ; and the moon may shine in at the 
 casement . 
 quinc . ay ; or els one must come in with a bush of thorn and a 
 lantern , and say he come to disfigur or to present the person 
 of moonshin . then there is anoth thing : we must have a wall in 
 the great chamber ; for pyramu and thisbi , say the stori , did 
 talk through the chink of a wall . 
 snout . you can never bring in a wall . what say you , bottom ? 
 bottom . some man or other must present wall ; and let him have some 
 plaster , or some loam , or some rough-cast about him , to signifi 
 wall ; and let him hold hi finger thu , and through that cranni 
 shall pyramu and thisbi whisper . 
 quinc . if that may be , then all is well . come , sit down , everi 
 mother 's son , and rehears your part . pyramu , you begin ; when 
 you have spoken your speech , enter into that brake ; and so everi 
 one accord to hi cue . 
 
 enter puck behind 
 
 puck . what hempen homespun have we swagg'r here , 
 so near the cradl of the fairi queen ? 
 what , a play toward ! i 'll be an auditor ; 
 an actor too perhap , if i see caus . 
 quinc . speak , pyramu . thisbi , stand forth . 
 bottom . thisbi , the flower of odiou savour sweet- 
 quinc . 'odious'- odor ! 
 bottom . -odour savour sweet ; 
 so hath thi breath , my dearest thisbi dear . 
 but hark , a voic ! stay thou but here awhil , 
 and by and by i will to thee appear . exit 
 puck . a stranger pyramu than e'er play here ! exit 
 flute . must i speak now ? 
 quinc . ay , marri , must you ; for you must understand he goe but to 
 see a nois that he heard , and is to come again . 
 flute . most radiant pyramu , most lily-whit of hue , 
 of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier , 
 most briski juven , and eke most love jew , 
 as true as truest hors , that would never tire , 
 i 'll meet thee , pyramu , at ninni 's tomb . 
 quinc . 'ninu ' tomb , ' man ! whi , you must not speak that yet ; that 
 you answer to pyramu . you speak all your part at onc , cue , and 
 all . pyramu enter : your cue is past ; it is 'never tire . ' 
 flute . o- as true as truest hors , that y et would never tire . 
 
 re-ent puck , and bottom with an ass 's head 
 
 bottom . if i were fair , thisbi , i were onli thine . 
 quinc . o monstrou ! o strang ! we are haunt . pray , master ! fli , 
 master ! help ! 
 exeunt all but bottom and puck 
 puck . i 'll follow you ; i 'll lead you about a round , 
 through bog , through bush , through brake , through brier ; 
 sometim a hors i 'll be , sometim a hound , 
 a hog , a headless bear , sometim a fire ; 
 and neigh , and bark , and grunt , and roar , and burn , 
 like hors , hound , hog , bear , fire , at everi turn . 
 exit 
 bottom . whi do they run away ? thi is a knaveri of them to make me 
 afeard . 
 
 re-ent snout 
 
 snout . o bottom , thou art chang 'd ! what do i see on thee ? 
 bottom . what do you see ? you see an ass-head of your own , do you ? 
 exit snout 
 
 re-ent quinc 
 
 quinc . bless thee , bottom , bless thee ! thou art translat . 
 exit 
 bottom . i see their knaveri : thi is to make an ass of me ; to 
 fright me , if they could . but i will not stir from thi place , do 
 what they can ; i will walk up and down here , and will sing , that 
 they shall hear i am not afraid . [ sing ] 
 
 the ousel cock , so black of hue , 
 with orange-tawni bill , 
 the throstl with hi note so true , 
 the wren with littl quill . 
 
 titania . what angel wake me from my flow'ri bed ? 
 bottom . [ sing ] 
 the finch , the sparrow , and the lark , 
 the plain-song cuckoo grey , 
 whose note full mani a man doth mark , 
 and dare not answer nay- 
 for , inde , who would set hi wit to so foolish a bird ? 
 who would give a bird the he , though he cri 'cuckoo ' never so ? 
 titania . i pray thee , gentl mortal , sing again . 
 mine ear is much enamour of thi note ; 
 so is mine eye enthral to thi shape ; 
 and thi fair virtu 's forc perforc doth move me , 
 on the first view , to say , to swear , i love thee . 
 bottom . methink , mistress , you should have littl reason for that . 
 and yet , to say the truth , reason and love keep littl compani 
 togeth now-a-day . the more the piti that some honest 
 neighbour will not make them friend . nay , i can gleek upon 
 occas . 
 titania . thou art as wise as thou art beauti . 
 bottom . not so , neither ; but if i had wit enough to get out of thi 
 wood , i have enough to serv mine own turn . 
 titania . out of thi wood do not desir to go ; 
 thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no . 
 i am a spirit of no common rate ; 
 the summer still doth tend upon my state ; 
 and i do love thee ; therefor , go with me . 
 i 'll give thee fairi to attend on thee ; 
 and they shall fetch thee jewel from the deep , 
 and sing , while thou on press flower dost sleep ; 
 and i will purg thi mortal gross so 
 that thou shalt like an airi spirit go . 
 peaseblossom ! cobweb ! moth ! and mustardse ! 
 
 enter peaseblossom , cobweb , moth , and mustardse 
 
 peaseblossom . readi . 
 cobweb . and i . 
 moth . and i . 
 mustardse . and i . 
 all . where shall we go ? 
 titania . be kind and courteou to thi gentleman ; 
 hop in hi walk and gambol in hi eye ; 
 feed him with apricock and dewberri , 
 with purpl grape , green fig , and mulberri ; 
 the honey bag steal from the humble-be , 
 and for night-tap crop their waxen thigh , 
 and light them at the fieri glow-worm 's eye , 
 to have my love to bed and to aris ; 
 and pluck the wing from paint butterfli , 
 to fan the moonbeam from hi sleep eye . 
 nod to him , elv , and do him courtesi . 
 peaseblossom . hail , mortal ! 
 cobweb . hail ! 
 moth . hail ! 
 mustardse . hail ! 
 bottom . i cri your worship merci , heartili ; i beseech your 
 worship 's name . 
 cobweb . cobweb . 
 bottom . i shall desir you of more acquaint , good master 
 cobweb . if i cut my finger , i shall make bold with you . your 
 name , honest gentleman ? 
 peaseblossom . peaseblossom . 
 bottom . i pray you , commend me to mistress squash , your mother , and 
 to master peascod , your father . good master peaseblossom , i shall 
 desir you of more acquaint too . your name , i beseech you , 
 sir ? 
 mustardse . mustardse . 
 bottom . good master mustardse , i know your patienc well . that 
 same cowardli giant-lik ox-beef hath devour 'd mani a gentleman 
 of your hous . i promis you your kindr hath made my eye water 
 ere now . i desir you of more acquaint , good master 
 mustardse . 
 titania . come , wait upon him ; lead him to my bower . 
 the moon , methink , look with a wat'ri eye ; 
 and when she weep , weep everi littl flower ; 
 lament some enforc chastiti . 
 tie up my love 's tongu , bring him silent . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 anoth part of the wood 
 
 enter oberon 
 
 oberon . i wonder if titania be awak 'd ; 
 then , what it wa that next came in her eye , 
 which she must dote on in extrem . 
 
 enter puck 
 
 here come my messeng . how now , mad spirit ! 
 what night-rul now about thi haunt grove ? 
 puck . my mistress with a monster is in love . 
 near to her close and consecr bower , 
 while she wa in her dull and sleep hour , 
 a crew of patch , rude mechan , 
 that work for bread upon athenian stall , 
 were met togeth to rehears a play 
 intend for great theseu ' nuptial day . 
 the shallowest thickskin of that barren sort , 
 who pyramu present , in their sport 
 forsook hi scene and ent'r in a brake ; 
 when i did him at thi advantag take , 
 an ass 's nole i fix on hi head . 
 anon hi thisbi must be answer , 
 and forth my mimic come . when they him spi , 
 as wild gees that the creep fowler eye , 
 or russet-p chough , mani in sort , 
 rise and caw at the gun 's report , 
 sever themselv and madli sweep the sky , 
 so at hi sight away hi fellow fli ; 
 and at our stamp here , o'er and o'er one fall ; 
 he murder cri , and help from athen call . 
 their sens thu weak , lost with their fear thu strong , 
 made senseless thing begin to do them wrong , 
 for brier and thorn at their apparel snatch ; 
 some sleev , some hat , from yielder all thing catch . 
 i led them on in thi distract fear , 
 and left sweet pyramu translat there ; 
 when in that moment , so it came to pass , 
 titania wak 'd , and straightway lov 'd an ass . 
 oberon . thi fall out better than i could devis . 
 but hast thou yet latch 'd the athenian 's eye 
 with the love-juic , as i did bid thee do ? 
 puck . i took him sleeping- that is finish 'd too- 
 and the athenian woman by hi side ; 
 that , when he wak 'd , of forc she must be ey 'd . 
 
 enter demetriu and hermia 
 
 oberon . stand close ; thi is the same athenian . 
 puck . thi is the woman , but not thi the man . 
 demetriu . o , whi rebuk you him that love you so ? 
 lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe . 
 hermia . now i but chide , but i should use thee wors , 
 for thou , i fear , hast given me caus to curs . 
 if thou hast slain lysand in hi sleep , 
 be o'er shoe in blood , plung in the deep , 
 and kill me too . 
 the sun wa not so true unto the day 
 as he to me . would he have stolen away 
 from sleep hermia ? i 'll believ as soon 
 thi whole earth may be bor 'd , and that the moon 
 may through the centr creep and so displeas 
 her brother 's noontid with th ' antipod . 
 it can not be but thou hast murd'r him ; 
 so should a murder look- so dead , so grim . 
 demetriu . so should the murder look ; and so should i , 
 pierc 'd through the heart with your stern cruelti ; 
 yet you , the murder , look as bright , as clear , 
 as yonder venu in her glimmer sphere . 
 hermia . what 's thi to my lysand ? where is he ? 
 ah , good demetriu , wilt thou give him me ? 
 demetriu . i had rather give hi carcass to my hound . 
 hermia . out , dog ! out , cur ! thou driv'st me past the bound 
 of maiden 's patienc . hast thou slain him , then ? 
 henceforth be never numb'r among men ! 
 o , onc tell true ; tell true , even for my sake ! 
 durst thou have look 'd upon him be awak , 
 and hast thou kill 'd him sleep ? o brave touch ! 
 could not a worm , an adder , do so much ? 
 an adder did it ; for with doubler tongu 
 than thine , thou serpent , never adder stung . 
 demetriu . you spend your passion on a mispri 'd mood : 
 i am not guilti of lysand 's blood ; 
 nor is he dead , for aught that i can tell . 
 hermia . i pray thee , tell me then that he is well . 
 demetriu . an if i could , what should i get therefor ? 
 hermia . a privileg never to see me more . 
 and from thi hate presenc part i so ; 
 see me no more whether he be dead or no . exit 
 demetriu . there is no follow her in thi fierc vein ; 
 here , therefor , for a while i will remain . 
 so sorrow 's heavi doth heavier grow 
 for debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe ; 
 which now in some slight measur it will pay , 
 if for hi tender here i make some stay . [ lie down ] 
 oberon . what hast thou done ? thou hast mistaken quit , 
 and laid the love-juic on some true-lov 's sight . 
 of thi mispris must perforc ensu 
 some true love turn 'd , and not a fals turn 'd true . 
 puck . then fate o'er-rul , that , one man hold troth , 
 a million fail , confound oath on oath . 
 oberon . about the wood go swifter than the wind , 
 and helena of athen look thou find ; 
 all fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer , 
 with sigh of love that cost the fresh blood dear . 
 by some illus see thou bring her here ; 
 i 'll charm hi eye against she do appear . 
 puck . i go , i go ; look how i go , 
 swifter than arrow from the tartar 's bow . exit 
 oberon . flower of thi purpl dye , 
 hit with cupid 's archeri , 
 sink in appl of hi eye . 
 when hi love he doth espi , 
 let her shine as glorious 
 as the venu of the sky . 
 when thou wak'st , if she be by , 
 beg of her for remedi . 
 
 re-ent puck 
 
 puck . captain of our fairi band , 
 helena is here at hand , 
 and the youth mistook by me 
 plead for a lover 's fee ; 
 shall we their fond pageant see ? 
 lord , what fool these mortal be ! 
 oberon . stand asid . the nois they make 
 will caus demetriu to awak . 
 puck . then will two at onc woo one . 
 that must need be sport alon ; 
 and those thing do best pleas me 
 that befal prepost'r . 
 
 enter lysand and helena 
 
 lysand . whi should you think that i should woo in scorn ? 
 scorn and deris never come in tear . 
 look when i vow , i weep ; and vow so born , 
 in their nativ all truth appear . 
 how can these thing in me seem scorn to you , 
 bear the badg of faith , to prove them true ? 
 helena . you do advanc your cun more and more . 
 when truth kill truth , o devilish-holi fray ! 
 these vow are hermia 's . will you give her o'er ? 
 weigh oath with oath , and you will noth weigh : 
 your vow to her and me , put in two scale , 
 will even weigh ; and both as light as tale . 
 lysand . i hod no judgment when to her i swore . 
 helena . nor none , in my mind , now you give her o'er . 
 lysand . demetriu love her , and he love not you . 
 demetriu . [ awak ] o helen , goddess , nymph , perfect , divin ! 
 to what , my love , shall i compar thine eyn ? 
 crystal is muddi . o , how ripe in show 
 thi lip , those kiss cherri , tempt grow ! 
 that pure congeal white , high tauru ' snow , 
 fann 'd with the eastern wind , turn to a crow 
 when thou hold'st up thi hand . o , let me kiss 
 thi princess of pure white , thi seal of bliss ! 
 helena . o spite ! o hell ! i see you all are bent 
 to set against me for your merriment . 
 if you were civil and knew courtesi , 
 you would not do me thu much injuri . 
 can you not hate me , as i know you do , 
 but you must join in soul to mock me too ? 
 if you were men , as men you are in show , 
 you would not use a gentl ladi so : 
 to vow , and swear , and superprais my part , 
 when i am sure you hate me with your heart . 
 you both are rival , and love hermia ; 
 and now both rival , to mock helena . 
 a trim exploit , a manli enterpris , 
 to conjur tear up in a poor maid 's eye 
 with your deris ! none of nobl sort 
 would so offend a virgin , and extort 
 a poor soul 's patienc , all to make you sport . 
 lysand . you are unkind , demetriu ; be not so ; 
 for you love hermia . thi you know i know ; 
 and here , with all good will , with all my heart , 
 in hermia 's love i yield you up my part ; 
 and your of helena to me bequeath , 
 whom i do love and will do till my death . 
 helena . never did mocker wast more idl breath . 
 demetriu . lysand , keep thi hermia ; i will none . 
 if e'er i lov 'd her , all that love is gone . 
 my heart to her but as guest-wis sojourn 'd , 
 and now to helen is it home return 'd , 
 there to remain . 
 lysand . helen , it is not so . 
 demetriu . disparag not the faith thou dost not know , 
 lest , to thi peril , thou abi it dear . 
 look where thi love come ; yonder is thi dear . 
 
 enter hermia 
 
 hermia . dark night , that from the eye hi function take , 
 the ear more quick of apprehens make ; 
 wherein it doth impair the see sens , 
 it pay the hear doubl recompens . 
 thou art not by mine eye , lysand , found ; 
 mine ear , i thank it , brought me to thi sound . 
 but whi unkindli didst thou leav me so ? 
 lysand . whi should he stay whom love doth press to go ? 
 hermia . what love could press lysand from my side ? 
 lysand . lysand 's love , that would not let him bide- 
 fair helena , who more engild the night 
 than all yon fieri oe and eye of light . 
 whi seek'st thou me ? could not thi make thee know 
 the hate i bare thee made me leav thee so ? 
 hermia . you speak not as you think ; it can not be . 
 helena . lo , she is one of thi confederaci ! 
 now i perceiv they have conjoin 'd all three 
 to fashion thi fals sport in spite of me . 
 injuri hermia ! most ungrat maid ! 
 have you conspir 'd , have you with these contriv 'd , 
 to bait me with thi foul deris ? 
 is all the counsel that we two have shar 'd , 
 the sister ' vow , the hour that we have spent , 
 when we have chid the hasty-foot time 
 for part us- o , is all forgot ? 
 all school-day ' friendship , childhood innoc ? 
 we , hermia , like two artifici god , 
 have with our needl creat both one flower , 
 both on one sampler , sit on one cushion , 
 both warbl of one song , both in one key ; 
 as if our hand , our side , voic , and mind , 
 had been incorpor . so we grew togeth , 
 like to a doubl cherri , seem part , 
 but yet an union in partit , 
 two love berri mould on one stern ; 
 so , with two seem bodi , but one heart ; 
 two of the first , like coat in heraldri , 
 due but to one , and crown with one crest . 
 and will you rent our ancient love asund , 
 to join with men in scorn your poor friend ? 
 it is not friendli , 't is not maidenli ; 
 our sex , as well as i , may chide you for it , 
 though i alon do feel the injuri . 
 hermia . i am amaz at your passion word ; 
 i scorn you not ; it seem that you scorn me . 
 helena . have you not set lysand , as in scorn , 
 to follow me and prais my eye and face ? 
 and made your other love , demetriu , 
 who even but now did spurn me with hi foot , 
 to call me goddess , nymph , divin , and rare , 
 preciou , celesti ? wherefor speak he thi 
 to her he hate ? and wherefor doth lysand 
 deni your love , so rich within hi soul , 
 and tender me , forsooth , affect , 
 but by your set on , by your consent ? 
 what though i be not so in grace as you , 
 so hung upon with love , so fortun , 
 but miser most , to love unlov 'd ? 
 thi you should piti rather than despis . 
 hermia . i understand not what you mean by thi . 
 helena . ay , do- persev , counterfeit sad look , 
 make mouth upon me when i turn my back , 
 wink each at other ; hold the sweet jest up ; 
 thi sport , well carri , shall be chronicl . 
 if you have ani piti , grace , or manner , 
 you would not make me such an argument . 
 but fare ye well ; 't is partli my own fault , 
 which death , or absenc , soon shall remedi . 
 lysand . stay , gentl helena ; hear my excus ; 
 my love , my life , my soul , fair helena ! 
 helena . o excel ! 
 hermia . sweet , do not scorn her so . 
 demetriu . if she can not entreat , i can compel . 
 lysand . thou canst compel no more than she entreat ; 
 thi threat have no more strength than her weak prayer 
 helen , i love thee , by my life i do ; 
 i swear by that which i will lose for thee 
 to prove him fals that say i love thee not . 
 demetriu . i say i love thee more than he can do . 
 lysand . if thou say so , withdraw , and prove it too . 
 demetriu . quick , come . 
 hermia . lysand , whereto tend all thi ? 
 lysand . away , you ethiop ! 
 demetriu . no , no , he will 
 seem to break loose- take on as you would follow , 
 but yet come not . you are a tame man ; go ! 
 lysand . hang off , thou cat , thou burr ; vile thing , let loos , 
 or i will shake thee from me like a serpent . 
 hermia . whi are you grown so rude ? what chang is thi , 
 sweet love ? 
 lysand . thi love ! out , tawni tartar , out ! 
 out , loath med'cin ! o hate potion , henc ! 
 hermia . do you not jest ? 
 helena . ye , sooth ; and so do you . 
 lysand . demetriu , i will keep my word with thee . 
 demetriu . i would i had your bond ; for i perceiv 
 a weak bond hold you ; i 'll not trust your word . 
 lysand . what , should i hurt her , strike her , kill her dead ? 
 although i hate her , i 'll not harm her so . 
 hermia . what ! can you do me greater harm than hate ? 
 hate me ! wherefor ? o me ! what news , my love ? 
 am not i hermia ? are not you lysand ? 
 i am as fair now as i wa erewhil . 
 sinc night you lov 'd me ; yet sinc night you left me . 
 whi then , you left me- o , the god forbid ! - 
 in earnest , shall i say ? 
 lysand . ay , by my life ! 
 and never did desir to see thee more . 
 therefor be out of hope , of question , of doubt ; 
 be certain , noth truer ; 't is no jest 
 that i do hate thee and love helena . 
 hermia . o me ! you juggler ! you cankerblossom ! 
 you thief of love ! what ! have you come by night , 
 and stol'n my love 's heart from him ? 
 helena . fine , i ' faith ! 
 have you no modesti , no maiden shame , 
 no touch of bash ? what ! will you tear 
 impati answer from my gentl tongu ? 
 fie , fie ! you counterfeit , you puppet you ! 
 hermia . 'puppet ! ' whi so ? ay , that way goe the game . 
 now i perceiv that she hath made compar 
 between our statur ; she hath urg 'd her height ; 
 and with her personag , her tall personag , 
 her height , forsooth , she hath prevail 'd with him . 
 and are you grown so high in hi esteem 
 becaus i am so dwarfish and so low ? 
 how low am i , thou paint maypol ? speak . 
 how low am i ? i am not yet so low 
 but that my nail can reach unto thine eye . 
 helena . i pray you , though you mock me , gentlemen , 
 let her not hurt me . i wa never curst ; 
 i have no gift at all in shrewish ; 
 i am a right maid for my cowardic ; 
 let her not strike me . you perhap may think , 
 becaus she is someth lower than myself , 
 that i can match her . 
 hermia . 'lower ' hark , again . 
 helena . good hermia , do not be so bitter with me . 
 i evermor did love you , hermia , 
 did ever keep your counsel , never wrong 'd you ; 
 save that , in love unto demetriu , 
 i told him of your stealth unto thi wood . 
 he follow you ; for love i follow him ; 
 but he hath chid me henc , and threat'n me 
 to strike me , spurn me , nay , to kill me too ; 
 and now , so you will let me quiet go , 
 to athen will i bear my folli back , 
 and follow you no further . let me go . 
 you see how simpl and how fond i am . 
 hermia . whi , get you gone ! who is't that hinder you ? 
 helena . a foolish heart that i leav here behind . 
 hermia . what ! with lysand ? 
 helena . with demetriu . 
 lysand . be not afraid ; she shall not harm thee , helena . 
 demetriu . no , sir , she shall not , though you take her part . 
 helena . o , when she is angri , she is keen and shrewd ; 
 she wa a vixen when she went to school ; 
 and , though she be but littl , she is fierc . 
 hermia . 'littl ' again ! noth but 'low ' and 'littl ' ! 
 whi will you suffer her to flout me thu ? 
 let me come to her . 
 lysand . get you gone , you dwarf ; 
 you minimu , of hind'r knot-grass made ; 
 you bead , you acorn . 
 demetriu . you are too offici 
 in her behalf that scorn your servic . 
 let her alon ; speak not of helena ; 
 take not her part ; for if thou dost intend 
 never so littl show of love to her , 
 thou shalt abi it . 
 lysand . now she hold me not . 
 now follow , if thou dar'st , to tri whose right , 
 of thine or mine , is most in helena . 
 demetriu . follow ! nay , i 'll go with thee , cheek by jowl . 
 exeunt lysand and demetriu 
 hermia . you , mistress , all thi coil is long of you . 
 nay , go not back . 
 helena . i will not trust you , i ; 
 nor longer stay in your curst compani . 
 your hand than mine are quicker for a fray ; 
 my leg are longer though , to run away . exit 
 hermia . i am amaz 'd , and know not what to say . exit 
 oberon . thi is thi neglig . still thou mistak'st , 
 or els committ'st thi knaveri wil . 
 puck . believ me , king of shadow , i mistook . 
 did not you tell me i should know the man 
 by the athenian garment he had on ? 
 and so far blameless prove my enterpris 
 that i have 'noint an athenian 's eye ; 
 and so far am i glad it so did sort , 
 as thi their jangl i esteem a sport . 
 oberon . thou seest these lover seek a place to fight . 
 hie therefor , robin , overcast the night ; 
 the starri welkin cover thou anon 
 with droop fog as black as acheron , 
 and lead these testi rival so astray 
 as one come not within anoth 's way . 
 like to lysand sometim frame thi tongu , 
 then stir demetriu up with bitter wrong ; 
 and sometim rail thou like demetriu ; 
 and from each other look thou lead them thu , 
 till o'er their brow death-counterfeit sleep 
 with leaden leg and batti wing doth creep . 
 then crush thi herb into lysand 's eye ; 
 whose liquor hath thi virtuou properti , 
 to take from thenc all error with hi might 
 and make hi eyebal roll with wont sight . 
 when they next wake , all thi deris 
 shall seem a dream and fruitless vision ; 
 and back to athen shall the lover wend 
 with leagu whose date till death shall never end . 
 while i in thi affair do thee employ , 
 i 'll to my queen , and beg her indian boy ; 
 and then i will her charm eye releas 
 from monster 's view , and all thing shall be peac . 
 puck . my fairi lord , thi must be done with hast , 
 for night 's swift dragon cut the cloud full fast ; 
 and yonder shine aurora 's harbing , 
 at whose approach ghost , wand'r here and there , 
 troop home to churchyard . damn spirit all 
 that in cross-way and flood have burial , 
 alreadi to their wormi bed are gone , 
 for fear lest day should look their shame upon ; 
 they wil themselv exil 'd from light , 
 and must for aye consort with black-brow 'd night . 
 oberon . but we are spirit of anoth sort : 
 i with the morn 's love have oft made sport ; 
 and , like a forest , the grove may tread 
 even till the eastern gate , all fieri red , 
 open on neptun with fair bless beam , 
 turn into yellow gold hi salt green stream . 
 but , notwithstand , hast , make no delay ; 
 we may effect thi busi yet ere day . exit oberon 
 puck . up and down , up and down , 
 i will lead them up and down . 
 i am fear 'd in field and town . 
 goblin , lead them up and down . 
 here come one . 
 
 enter lysand 
 
 lysand . where art thou , proud demetriu ? speak thou now . 
 puck . here , villain , drawn and readi . where art thou ? 
 lysand . i will be with thee straight . 
 puck . follow me , then , 
 to plainer ground . exit lysand as follow the voic 
 
 enter demetriu 
 
 demetriu . lysand , speak again . 
 thou runaway , thou coward , art thou fled ? 
 speak ! in some bush ? where dost thou hide thi head ? 
 puck . thou coward , art thou brag to the star , 
 tell the bush that thou look'st for war , 
 and wilt not come ? come , recreant , come , thou child ; 
 i 'll whip thee with a rod . he is defil 'd 
 that draw a sword on thee . 
 demetriu . yea , art thou there ? 
 puck . follow my voic ; we 'll tri no manhood here . exeunt 
 
 re-ent lysand 
 
 lysand . he goe befor me , and still dare me on ; 
 when i come where he call , then he is gone . 
 the villain is much lighter heel 'd than i . 
 i follow fast , but faster he did fli , 
 that fallen am i in dark uneven way , 
 and here will rest me . [ lie down ] come , thou gentl day . 
 for if but onc thou show me thi grey light , 
 i 'll find demetriu , and reveng thi spite . [ sleep ] 
 
 re-ent puck and demetriu 
 
 puck . ho , ho , ho ! coward , whi com'st thou not ? 
 demetriu . abid me , if thou dar'st ; for well i wot 
 thou run'st befor me , shift everi place , 
 and dar'st not stand , nor look me in the face . 
 where art thou now ? 
 puck . come hither ; i am here . 
 demetriu . nay , then , thou mock'st me . thou shalt buy thi dear , 
 if ever i thi face by daylight see ; 
 now , go thi way . faint constraineth me 
 to measur out my length on thi cold bed . 
 by day 's approach look to be visit . 
 [ lie down and sleep ] 
 
 enter helena 
 
 helena . o weari night , o long and tediou night , 
 abat thi hour ! shine comfort from the east , 
 that i may back to athen by daylight , 
 from these that my poor compani detest . 
 and sleep , that sometim shut up sorrow 's eye , 
 steal me awhil from mine own compani . [ sleep ] 
 puck . yet but three ? come one more ; 
 two of both kind make up four . 
 here she come , curst and sad . 
 cupid is a knavish lad , 
 thu to make poor femal mad . 
 
 enter hermia 
 
 hermia . never so weari , never so in woe , 
 bedabbl with the dew , and torn with brier , 
 i can no further crawl , no further go ; 
 my leg can keep no pace with my desir . 
 here will i rest me till the break of day . 
 heaven shield lysand , if they mean a fray ! 
 [ lie down and sleep ] 
 puck . on the ground 
 sleep sound ; 
 i 'll appli 
 to your eye , 
 gentl lover , remedi . 
 [ squeez the juic on lysand 's eye ] 
 when thou wak'st , 
 thou tak'st 
 true delight 
 in the sight 
 of thi former ladi 's eye ; 
 and the countri proverb known , 
 that everi man should take hi own , 
 in your wake shall be shown : 
 jack shall have jill ; 
 nought shall go ill ; 
 the man shall have hi mare again , and all shall be well . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the wood . lysand , demetriu , helena , and hermia , lie asleep 
 
 enter titania and bottom ; peaseblossom , cobweb , moth , mustardse , 
 and other fairi attend ; 
 oberon behind , unseen 
 
 titania . come , sit thee down upon thi flow'ri bed , 
 while i thi amiabl cheek do coy , 
 and stick musk-ros in thi sleek smooth head , 
 and kiss thi fair larg ear , my gentl joy . 
 bottom . where 's peaseblossom ? 
 peaseblossom . readi . 
 bottom . scratch my head , peaseblossom . 
 where 's mounsieur cobweb ? 
 cobweb . readi . 
 bottom . mounsieur cobweb ; good mounsieur , get you your weapon in 
 your hand and kill me a red-hipp 'd humble-be on the top of a 
 thistl ; and , good mounsieur , bring me the honey-bag . do not fret 
 yourself too much in the action , mounsieur ; and , good mounsieur , 
 have a care the honey-bag break not ; i would be loath to have you 
 overflown with a honey-bag , signior . where 's mounsieur 
 mustardse ? 
 mustardse . readi . 
 bottom . give me your neaf , mounsieur mustardse . pray you , leav 
 your curtsi , good mounsieur . 
 mustardse . what 's your will ? 
 bottom . noth , good mounsieur , but to help cavaleri cobweb to 
 scratch . i must to the barber 's , mounsieur ; for methink i am 
 marvel hairi about the face ; and i am such a tender ass , if 
 my hair do but tickl me i must scratch . 
 titania . what , wilt thou hear some music , my sweet love ? 
 bottom . i have a reason good ear in music . let 's have the tong 
 and the bone . 
 titania . or say , sweet love , what thou desirest to eat . 
 bottom . truli , a peck of provend ; i could munch your good dri 
 oat . methink i have a great desir to a bottl of hay . good 
 hay , sweet hay , hath no fellow . 
 titania . i have a ventur fairi that shall seek 
 the squirrel 's hoard , and fetch thee new nut . 
 bottom . i had rather have a hand or two of dri pea . but , i 
 pray you , let none of your peopl stir me ; i have an exposit 
 of sleep come upon me . 
 titania . sleep thou , and i will wind thee in my arm . 
 fairi , be gone , and be all way away . exeunt fairi 
 so doth the woodbin the sweet honeysuckl 
 gentli entwist ; the femal ivi so 
 enr the barki finger of the elm . 
 o , how i love thee ! how i dote on thee ! [ they sleep ] 
 
 enter puck 
 
 oberon . [ advanc ] welcom , good robin . seest thou thi sweet 
 sight ? 
 her dotag now i do begin to piti ; 
 for , meet her of late behind the wood , 
 seek sweet favour for thi hate fool , 
 i did upbraid her and fall out with her . 
 for she hi hairi templ then had round 
 with coronet of fresh and fragrant flower ; 
 and that same dew which sometim on the bud 
 wa wont to swell like round and orient pearl 
 stood now within the pretti floweret ' eye , 
 like tear that did their own disgrac bewail . 
 when i had at my pleasur taunt her , 
 and she in mild term begg 'd my patienc , 
 i then did ask of her her changel child ; 
 which straight she gave me , and her fairi sent 
 to bear him to my bower in fairi land . 
 and now i have the boy , i will undo 
 thi hate imperfect of her eye . 
 and , gentl puck , take thi transform scalp 
 from off the head of thi athenian swain , 
 that he awak when the other do 
 may all to athen back again repair , 
 and think no more of thi night 's accid 
 but as the fierc vexat of a dream . 
 but first i will releas the fairi queen . 
 [ touch her eye ] 
 be as thou wast wont to be ; 
 see as thou wa wont to see . 
 dian 's bud o'er cupid 's flower 
 hath such forc and bless power . 
 now , my titania ; wake you , my sweet queen . 
 titania . my oberon ! what vision have i seen ! 
 methought i wa enamour 'd of an ass . 
 oberon . there lie your love . 
 titania . how came these thing to pass ? 
 o , how mine eye do loath hi visag now ! 
 oberon . silenc awhil . robin , take off thi head . 
 titania , music call ; and strike more dead 
 than common sleep of all these five the sens . 
 titania . music , ho , music , such as charmeth sleep ! 
 puck . now when thou wak'st with thine own fool 's eye peep . 
 oberon . sound , music . come , my queen , take hand with me , 
 [ music ] 
 and rock the ground whereon these sleeper be . 
 now thou and i are new in amiti , 
 and will to-morrow midnight solemnli 
 danc in duke theseu ' hous triumphantli , 
 and bless it to all fair prosper . 
 there shall the pair of faith lover be 
 wed , with theseu , an in jolliti . 
 puck . fairi king , attend and mark ; 
 i do hear the morn lark . 
 oberon . then , my queen , in silenc sad , 
 trip we after night 's shade . 
 we the globe can compass soon , 
 swifter than the wand'r moon . 
 titania . come , my lord ; and in our flight , 
 tell me how it came thi night 
 that i sleep here wa found 
 with these mortal on the ground . exeunt 
 
 to the wind of horn , enter theseu , hippolyta , 
 egeu , and train 
 
 theseu . go , one of you , find out the forest ; 
 for now our observ is perform 'd , 
 and sinc we have the vaward of the day , 
 my love shall hear the music of my hound . 
 uncoupl in the western valley ; let them go . 
 dispatch , i say , and find the forest . exit an attend 
 we will , fair queen , up to the mountain 's top , 
 and mark the music confus 
 of hound and echo in conjunct . 
 hippolyta . i wa with hercul and cadmu onc 
 when in a wood of crete they bay 'd the bear 
 with hound of sparta ; never did i hear 
 such gallant chide , for , besid the grove , 
 the sky , the fountain , everi region near 
 seem 'd all one mutual cri . i never heard 
 so music a discord , such sweet thunder . 
 theseu . my hound are bred out of the spartan kind , 
 so flew 'd , so sand ; and their head are hung 
 with ear that sweep away the morn dew ; 
 crook-kne 'd and dew-lapp 'd like thessalian bull ; 
 slow in pursuit , but match 'd in mouth like bell , 
 each under each . a cri more tuneabl 
 wa never holla 'd to , nor cheer 'd with horn , 
 in crete , in sparta , nor in thessali . 
 judg when you hear . but , soft , what nymph are these ? 
 egeu . my lord , thi is my daughter here asleep , 
 and thi lysand , thi demetriu is , 
 thi helena , old nedar 's helena . 
 i wonder of their be here togeth . 
 theseu . no doubt they rose up earli to observ 
 the rite of may ; and , hear our intent , 
 came here in grace of our solemn . 
 but speak , egeu ; is not thi the day 
 that hermia should give answer of her choic ? 
 egeu . it is , my lord . 
 theseu . go , bid the huntsmen wake them with their horn . 
 [ horn and shout within . the sleeper 
 awak and kneel to theseu ] 
 good-morrow , friend . saint valentin is past ; 
 begin these wood-bird but to coupl now ? 
 lysand . pardon , my lord . 
 theseu . i pray you all , stand up . 
 i know you two are rival enemi ; 
 how come thi gentl concord in the world 
 that hatr is so far from jealousi 
 to sleep by hate , and fear no enmiti ? 
 lysand . my lord , i shall repli amazedli , 
 half sleep , half wake ; but as yet , i swear , 
 i can not truli say how i came here , 
 but , as i think- for truli would i speak , 
 and now i do bethink me , so it is- 
 i came with hermia hither . our intent 
 wa to be gone from athen , where we might , 
 without the peril of the athenian law- 
 egeu . enough , enough , my lord ; you have enough ; 
 i beg the law , the law upon hi head . 
 they would have stol'n away , they would , demetriu , 
 therebi to have defeat you and me : 
 you of your wife , and me of my consent , 
 of my consent that she should be your wife . 
 demetriu . my lord , fair helen told me of their stealth , 
 of thi their purpos hither to thi wood ; 
 and i in furi hither follow them , 
 fair helena in fanci follow me . 
 but , my good lord , i wot not by what power- 
 but by some power it is- my love to hermia , 
 melt as the snow , seem to me now 
 as the remembr of an idl gaud 
 which in my childhood i did dote upon ; 
 and all the faith , the virtu of my heart , 
 the object and the pleasur of mine eye , 
 is onli helena . to her , my lord , 
 wa i betroth 'd ere i saw hermia . 
 but , like a sick , did i loath thi food ; 
 but , as in health , come to my natur tast , 
 now i do wish it , love it , long for it , 
 and will for evermor be true to it . 
 theseu . fair lover , you are fortun met ; 
 of thi discours we more will hear anon . 
 egeu , i will overbear your will ; 
 for in the templ , by and by , with us 
 these coupl shall etern be knit . 
 and , for the morn now is someth worn , 
 our purpo 'd hunt shall be set asid . 
 away with us to athen , three and three ; 
 we 'll hold a feast in great solemn . 
 come , hippolyta . 
 exeunt theseu , hippolyta , egeu , and train 
 demetriu . these thing seem small and undistinguish , 
 like far-off mountain turn into cloud . 
 hermia . methink i see these thing with part eye , 
 when everi thing seem doubl . 
 helena . so methink ; 
 and i have found demetriu like a jewel , 
 mine own , and not mine own . 
 demetriu . are you sure 
 that we are awak ? it seem to me 
 that yet we sleep , we dream . do not you think 
 the duke wa here , and bid us follow him ? 
 hermia . yea , and my father . 
 helena . and hippolyta . 
 lysand . and he did bid us follow to the templ . 
 demetriu . whi , then , we are awak ; let 's follow him ; 
 and by the way let us recount our dream . exeunt 
 bottom . [ awak ] when my cue come , call me , and i will answer . my 
 next is 'most fair pyramu . ' heigh-ho ! peter quinc ! flute , the 
 bellows-mend ! snout , the tinker ! starvel ! god 's my life , 
 stol'n henc , and left me asleep ! i have had a most rare vision . 
 i have had a dream , past the wit of man to say what dream it wa . 
 man is but an ass if he go about to expound thi dream . methought 
 i was- there is no man can tell what . methought i wa , and 
 methought i had , but man is but a patch 'd fool , if he will offer 
 to say what methought i had . the eye of man hath not heard , the 
 ear of man hath not seen , man 's hand is not abl to tast , hi 
 tongu to conceiv , nor hi heart to report , what my dream wa . i 
 will get peter quinc to write a ballad of thi dream . it shall 
 be call 'd 'bottom 's dream , ' becaus it hath no bottom ; and i will 
 sing it in the latter end of a play , befor the duke . 
 peradventur , to make it the more graciou , i shall sing it at 
 her death . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 athen . quinc 's hous 
 
 enter quinc , flute , snout , and starvel 
 
 quinc . have you sent to bottom 's hous ? is he come home yet ? 
 starvel . he can not be heard of . out of doubt he is transport . 
 flute . if he come not , then the play is marr 'd ; it goe not 
 forward , doth it ? 
 quinc . it is not possibl . you have not a man in all athen abl 
 to discharg pyramu but he . 
 flute . no ; he hath simpli the best wit of ani handicraft man in 
 athen . 
 quinc . yea , and the best person too ; and he is a veri paramour for 
 a sweet voic . 
 flute . you must say 'paragon . ' a paramour is- god bless us ! - a 
 thing of naught . 
 
 enter snug 
 
 snug . master , the duke is come from the templ ; and there is two 
 or three lord and ladi more marri . if our sport had gone 
 forward , we had all been made men . 
 flute . o sweet bulli bottom ! thu hath he lost sixpenc a day 
 dure hi life ; he could not have scape sixpenc a day . an the 
 duke had not given him sixpenc a day for play pyramu , i 'll 
 be hang . he would have deserv it : sixpenc a day in pyramu , 
 or noth . 
 
 enter bottom 
 
 bottom . where are these lad ? where are these heart ? 
 quinc . bottom ! o most courag day ! o most happi hour ! 
 bottom . master , i am to discours wonder ; but ask me not what ; 
 for if i tell you , i am not true athenian . i will tell you 
 everyth , right as it fell out . 
 quinc . let us hear , sweet bottom . 
 bottom . not a word of me . all that i will tell you is , that the 
 duke hath dine . get your apparel togeth ; good string to your 
 beard , new ribbon to your pump ; meet present at the palac ; 
 everi man look o'er hi part ; for the short and the long is , our 
 play is preferr 'd . in ani case , let thisbi have clean linen ; and 
 let not him that play the lion pare hi nail , for they shall 
 hang out for the lion 's claw . and , most dear actor , eat no 
 onion nor garlic , for we are to utter sweet breath ; and i do not 
 doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedi . no more word . 
 away , go , away ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 athen . the palac of theseu 
 
 enter theseu , hippolyta , philostr , lord , and attend 
 
 hippolyta . 't is strang , my theseu , that these lover speak of . 
 theseu . more strang than true . i never may believ 
 these antiqu fabl , nor these fairi toy . 
 lover and madmen have such seeth brain , 
 such shape fantasi , that apprehend 
 more than cool reason ever comprehend . 
 the lunat , the lover , and the poet , 
 are of imagin all compact . 
 one see more devil than vast hell can hold ; 
 that is the madman . the lover , all as frantic , 
 see helen 's beauti in a brow of egypt . 
 the poet 's eye , in a fine frenzi roll , 
 doth glanc from heaven to earth , from earth to heaven ; 
 and as imagin bodi forth 
 the form of thing unknown , the poet 's pen 
 turn them to shape , and give to airi noth 
 a local habit and a name . 
 such trick hath strong imagin 
 that , if it would but apprehend some joy , 
 it comprehend some bringer of that joy ; 
 or in the night , imagin some fear , 
 how easi is a bush suppo 'd a bear ? 
 hippolyta . but all the stori of the night told over , 
 and all their mind transfigur 'd so togeth , 
 more witnesseth than fanci 's imag , 
 and grow to someth of great constanc , 
 but howsoev strang and admir . 
 
 enter lysand , demetriu , hermia , and helena 
 
 theseu . here come the lover , full of joy and mirth . 
 joy , gentl friend , joy and fresh day of love 
 accompani your heart ! 
 lysand . more than to us 
 wait in your royal walk , your board , your bed ! 
 theseu . come now ; what masqu , what danc shall we have , 
 to wear away thi long age of three hour 
 between our after-supp and bed-tim ? 
 where is our usual manag of mirth ? 
 what revel are in hand ? is there no play 
 to eas the anguish of a tortur hour ? 
 call philostr . 
 philostr . here , mighti theseu . 
 theseu . say , what abridg have you for thi even ? 
 what masqu ? what music ? how shall we beguil 
 the lazi time , if not with some delight ? 
 philostr . there is a brief how mani sport are ripe ; 
 make choic of which your high will see first . 
 [ give a paper ] 
 theseu . 'the battl with the centaur , to be sung 
 by an athenian eunuch to the harp . ' 
 we 'll none of that : that have i told my love , 
 in glori of my kinsman hercul . 
 'the riot of the tipsi bacchan , 
 tear the thracian singer in their rage . ' 
 that is an old devic , and it wa play 'd 
 when i from thebe came last a conqueror . 
 'the thrice three muse mourn for the death 
 of learn , late decea 'd in beggari . ' 
 that is some satir , keen and critic , 
 not sort with a nuptial ceremoni . 
 ' a tediou brief scene of young pyramu 
 and hi love thisbi ; veri tragic mirth . ' 
 merri and tragic ! tediou and brief ! 
 that is hot ice and wondrou strang snow . 
 how shall we find the concord of thi discord ? 
 philostr . a play there is , my lord , some ten word long , 
 which is as brief as i have known a play ; 
 but by ten word , my lord , it is too long , 
 which make it tediou ; for in all the play 
 there is not one word apt , one player fit . 
 and tragic , my nobl lord , it is ; 
 for pyramu therein doth kill himself . 
 which when i saw rehear 'd , i must confess , 
 made mine eye water ; but more merri tear 
 the passion of loud laughter never shed . 
 theseu . what are they that do play it ? 
 philostr . hard-hand men that work in athen here , 
 which never labour 'd in their mind till now ; 
 and now have toil 'd their unbreath memori 
 with thi same play against your nuptial . 
 theseu . and we will hear it . 
 philostr . no , my nobl lord , 
 it is not for you . i have heard it over , 
 and it is noth , noth in the world ; 
 unless you can find sport in their intent , 
 extrem stretch 'd and conn 'd with cruel pain , 
 to do you servic . 
 theseu . i will hear that play ; 
 for never anyth can be amiss 
 when simpl and duti tender it . 
 go , bring them in ; and take your place , ladi . 
 exit philostr 
 hippolyta . i love not to see wretched o'er-charg , 
 and duti in hi servic perish . 
 theseu . whi , gentl sweet , you shall see no such thing . 
 hippolyta . he say they can do noth in thi kind . 
 theseu . the kinder we , to give them thank for noth . 
 our sport shall be to take what they mistak ; 
 and what poor duti can not do , nobl respect 
 take it in might , not merit . 
 where i have come , great clerk have purpos 
 to greet me with premedit welcom ; 
 where i have seen them shiver and look pale , 
 make period in the midst of sentenc , 
 throttl their practi 'd accent in their fear , 
 and , in conclus , dumbl have broke off , 
 not pay me a welcom . trust me , sweet , 
 out of thi silenc yet i pick 'd a welcom ; 
 and in the modesti of fear duti 
 i read as much as from the rattl tongu 
 of sauci and audaci eloqu . 
 love , therefor , and tongue-ti simplic 
 in least speak most to my capac . 
 
 re-ent philostr 
 
 philostr . so pleas your grace , the prologu is address 'd . 
 theseu . let him approach . [ flourish of trumpet ] 
 
 enter quinc as the prologu 
 
 prologu . if we offend , it is with our good will . 
 that you should think , we come not to offend , 
 but with good will . to show our simpl skill , 
 that is the true begin of our end . 
 consid then , we come but in despit . 
 we do not come , as mind to content you , 
 our true intent is . all for your delight 
 we are not here . that you should here repent you , 
 the actor are at band ; and , by their show , 
 you shall know all , that you are like to know , 
 theseu . thi fellow doth not stand upon point . 
 lysand . he hath rid hi prologu like a rough colt ; he know not 
 the stop . a good moral , my lord : it is not enough to speak , but 
 to speak true . 
 hippolyta . inde he hath play 'd on thi prologu like a child on a 
 recorder- a sound , but not in govern . 
 theseu . hi speech wa like a tangl chain ; noth im pair , 
 but all disord . who is next ? 
 
 enter , with a trumpet befor them , as in dumb show , 
 pyramu and thisbi , wall , moonshin , and lion 
 
 prologu . gentl , perchanc you wonder at thi show ; 
 but wonder on , till truth make all thing plain . 
 thi man is pyramu , if you would know ; 
 thi beauteou ladi thisbi is certain . 
 thi man , with lime and rough-cast , doth present 
 wall , that vile wall which did these lover sunder ; 
 and through wall chink , poor soul , they are content 
 to whisper . at the which let no man wonder . 
 thi man , with lanthorn , dog , and bush of thorn , 
 presenteth moonshin ; for , if you will know , 
 by moonshin did these lover think no scorn 
 to meet at ninu ' tomb , there , there to woo . 
 thi grisli beast , which lion hight by name , 
 the trusti thisbi , come first by night , 
 did scare away , or rather did affright ; 
 and as she fled , her mantl she did fall ; 
 which lion vile with bloodi mouth did stain . 
 anon come pyramu , sweet youth and tall , 
 and find hi trusti thisbi 's mantl slain ; 
 whereat with blade , with bloodi blame blade , 
 he brave broach 'd hi boil bloodi breast ; 
 and thisbi , tarri in mulberri shade , 
 hi dagger drew , and die . for all the rest , 
 let lion , moonshin , wall , and lover twain , 
 at larg discours while here they do remain . 
 exeunt prologu , pyramu , thisbi , 
 lion , and moonshin 
 theseu . i wonder if the lion be to speak . 
 demetriu . no wonder , my lord : one lion may , when mani ass do . 
 wall . in thi same interlud it doth befal 
 that i , one snout by name , present a wall ; 
 and such a wall as i would have you think 
 that had in it a cranni hole or chink , 
 through which the lover , pyramu and thisbi , 
 did whisper often veri secretli . 
 thi loam , thi rough-cast , and thi stone , doth show 
 that i am that same wall ; the truth is so ; 
 and thi the cranni is , right and sinist , 
 through which the fear lover are to whisper . 
 theseu . would you desir lime and hair to speak better ? 
 demetriu . it is the wittiest partit that ever i heard 
 discours , my lord . 
 
 enter pyramu 
 
 theseu . pyramu draw near the wall ; silenc . 
 pyramu . o grim-look 'd night ! o night with hue so black ! 
 o night , which ever art when day is not ! 
 o night , o night , alack , alack , alack , 
 i fear my thisbi 's promis is forgot ! 
 and thou , o wall , o sweet , o love wall , 
 that stand'st between her father 's ground and mine ; 
 thou wall , o wall , o sweet and love wall , 
 show me thi chink , to blink through with mine eyn . 
 [ wall hold up hi finger ] 
 thank , courteou wall . jove shield thee well for thi ! 
 but what see what see i ? no thisbi do i see . 
 o wick wall , through whom i see no bliss , 
 cur 'd he thi stone for thu deceiv me ! 
 theseu . the wall , methink , be sensibl , should curs again . 
 pyramu . no , in truth , sir , he should not . deceiv me is thisbi 's 
 cue . she is to enter now , and i am to spi her through the wall . 
 you shall see it will fall pat as i told you ; yonder she come . 
 
 enter thisbi 
 
 thisbi . o wall , full often hast thou beard my moan , 
 for part my fair pyramu and me ! 
 my cherri lip have often kiss 'd thi stone , 
 thi stone with lime and hair knit up in thee . 
 pyramu . i see a voic ; now will i to the chink , 
 to spi an i can hear my thisbi 's face . 
 thisbi ! 
 thisbi . my love ! thou art my love , i think . 
 pyramu . think what thou wilt , i am thi lover 's grace ; 
 and like limand am i trusti still . 
 thisbi . and i like helen , till the fate me kill . 
 pyramu . not shafalu to procru wa so true . 
 thisbi . as shafalu to procru , i to you . 
 pyramu . o , kiss me through the hole of thi vile wall . 
 thisbi . i kiss the wall 's hole , not your lip at all . 
 pyramu . wilt thou at ninni 's tomb meet me straightway ? 
 thisbi . tide life , tide death , i come without delay . 
 exeunt pyramu and thisbi 
 wall . thu have i , wall , my part discharg so ; 
 and , be done , thu wall away doth go . exit wall 
 theseu . now is the moon use between the two neighbour . 
 demetriu . no remedi , my lord , when wall are so wil to hear 
 without warn . 
 hippolyta . thi is the silliest stuff that ever i heard . 
 theseu . the best in thi kind are but shadow ; and the worst are 
 no wors , if imagin amend them . 
 hippolyta . it must be your imagin then , and not their . 
 theseu . if we imagin no wors of them than they of themselv , 
 they may pass for excel men . here come two nobl beast in , a 
 man and a lion . 
 
 enter lion and moonshin 
 
 lion . you , ladi , you , whose gentl heart do fear 
 the smallest monstrou mous that creep on floor , 
 may now , perchanc , both quak and trembl here , 
 when lion rough in wildest rage doth roar . 
 then know that i as snug the joiner am 
 a lion fell , nor els no lion 's dam ; 
 for , if i should as lion come in strife 
 into thi place , 'twere piti on my life . 
 theseu . a veri gentl beast , and of a good conscienc . 
 demetriu . the veri best at a beast , my lord , that e'er i saw . 
 lysand . thi lion is a veri fox for hi valour . 
 theseu . true ; and a goos for hi discret . 
 demetriu . not so , my lord ; for hi valour can not carri hi 
 discret , and the fox carri the goos . 
 theseu . hi discret , i am sure , can not carri hi valour ; for 
 the goos carri not the fox . it is well . leav it to hi 
 discret , and let us listen to the moon . 
 moonshin . thi lanthorn doth the horn moon present- 
 demetriu . he should have worn the horn on hi head . 
 theseu . he is no crescent , and hi horn are invis within the 
 circumfer . 
 moonshin . thi lanthorn doth the horn moon present ; 
 myself the man i ' th ' moon do seem to be . 
 theseu . thi is the greatest error of all the rest ; the man should 
 be put into the lantern . how is it els the man i ' th ' moon ? 
 demetriu . he dare not come there for the candl ; for , you see , it 
 is alreadi in snuff . 
 hippolyta . i am aweari of thi moon . would he would chang ! 
 theseu . it appear , by hi small light of discret , that he is 
 in the wane ; but yet , in courtesi , in all reason , we must stay 
 the time . 
 lysand . proceed , moon . 
 moon . all that i have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is 
 the moon ; i , the man i ' th ' moon ; thi thorn-bush , my thorn-bush ; 
 and thi dog , my dog . 
 demetriu . whi , all these should be in the lantern ; for all these 
 are in the moon . but silenc ; here come thisbi . 
 
 re-ent thisbi 
 
 thisbi . thi is old ninni 's tomb . where is my love ? 
 lion . [ roar ] o- [ thisbi run off ] 
 demetriu . well roar 'd , lion . 
 theseu . well run , thisbi . 
 hippolyta . well shone , moon . truli , the moon shine with a good 
 grace . [ the lion tear thisbi 's mantl , and exit ] 
 theseu . well mou 'd , lion . 
 
 re-ent pyramu 
 
 demetriu . and then came pyramu . 
 lysand . and so the lion vanish 'd . 
 pyramu . sweet moon , i thank thee for thi sunni beam ; 
 i thank thee , moon , for shine now so bright ; 
 for , by thi graciou golden , glitter gleam , 
 i trust to take of truest thisbi sight . 
 but stay , o spite ! 
 but mark , poor knight , 
 what dread dole is here ! 
 eye , do you see ? 
 how can it he ? 
 o dainti duck ! o dear ! 
 thi mantl good , 
 what ! stain 'd with blood ? 
 approach , ye furi fell . 
 o fate ! come , come ; 
 cut thread and thrum ; 
 quail , crush , conclud , and quell . 
 theseu . thi passion , and the death of a dear friend , would go 
 near to make a man look sad . 
 hippolyta . beshrew my heart , but i piti the man . 
 pyramu . o wherefor , natur , didst thou lion frame ? 
 sinc lion vile hath here deflow 'd my dear ; 
 which is- no , no- which wa the fairest dame 
 that liv 'd , that lov 'd , that lik 'd , that look 'd with cheer . 
 come , tear , confound ; 
 out , sword , and wound 
 the pap of pyramu ; 
 ay , that left pap , 
 where heart doth hop . [ stab himself ] 
 thu die i , thu , thu , thu . 
 now am i dead , 
 now am i fled ; 
 my soul is in the sky . 
 tongu , lose thi light ; 
 moon , take thi flight . [ exit moonshin ] 
 now die , die , die , die , die . [ die ] 
 demetriu . no die , but an ace , for him ; for he is but one . 
 lysand . less than an ace , man ; for he is dead ; he is noth . 
 theseu . with the help of a surgeon he might yet recov and yet 
 prove an ass . 
 hippolyta . how chanc moonshin is gone befor thisbi come back 
 and find her lover ? 
 
 re-ent thisbi 
 
 theseu . she will find him by starlight . here she come ; and her 
 passion end the play . 
 hippolyta . methink she should not use a long one for such a 
 pyramu ; i hope she will be brief . 
 demetriu . a mote will turn the balanc , which pyramu , which 
 thisbi , is the better- he for a man , god warrant us : she for a 
 woman , god bless us ! 
 lysand . she hath spi him alreadi with those sweet eye . 
 demetriu . and thu she moan , videlicet : - 
 thisbi . asleep , my love ? 
 what , dead , my dove ? 
 o pyramu , aris , 
 speak , speak . quit dumb ? 
 dead , dead ? a tomb 
 must cover thi sweet eye . 
 these lili lip , 
 thi cherri nose , 
 these yellow cowslip cheek , 
 are gone , are gone ; 
 lover , make moan ; 
 hi eye were green as leek . 
 o sister three , 
 come , come to me , 
 with hand as pale as milk ; 
 lay them in gore , 
 sinc you have shore 
 with shear hi thread of silk . 
 tongu , not a word . 
 come , trusti sword ; 
 come , blade , my breast imbru . [ stab herself ] 
 and farewel , friend ; 
 thu thisbi end ; 
 adieu , adieu , adieu . [ die ] 
 theseu . moonshin and lion are left to buri the dead . 
 demetriu . ay , and wall too . 
 bottom . [ start up ] no , i assur you ; the wall is down that 
 part their father . will it pleas you to see the epilogu , or 
 to hear a bergomask danc between two of our compani ? 
 theseu . no epilogu , i pray you ; for your play need no excus . 
 never excus ; for when the player are all dead there need none 
 to be blame . marri , if he that writ it had play pyramu , and 
 hang 'd himself in thisbi 's garter , it would have been a fine 
 tragedi . and so it is , truli ; and veri notabl discharg 'd . but 
 come , your bergomask ; let your epilogu alon . [ a danc ] 
 the iron tongu of midnight hath told twelv . 
 lover , to bed ; 't is almost fairi time . 
 i fear we shall out-sleep the come morn , 
 as much as we thi night have overwatch 'd . 
 thi palpable-gross play hath well beguil 'd 
 the heavi gait of night . sweet friend , to bed . 
 a fortnight hold we thi solemn , 
 in nightli revel and new jolliti . exeunt 
 
 enter puck with a broom 
 
 puck . now the hungri lion roar , 
 and the wolf behowl the moon ; 
 whilst the heavi ploughman snore , 
 all with weari task fordon . 
 now the wast brand do glow , 
 whilst the screech-owl , screech loud , 
 put the wretch that lie in woe 
 in remembr of a shroud . 
 now it is the time of night 
 that the grave , all gape wide , 
 everi one let forth hi sprite , 
 in the church-way path to glide . 
 and we fairi , that do run 
 by the tripl hecat 's team 
 from the presenc of the sun , 
 follow dark like a dream , 
 now are frolic . not a mous 
 shall disturb thi hallow hous . 
 i am sent with broom befor , 
 to sweep the dust behind the door . 
 
 enter oberon and titania , with all their train 
 
 oberon . through the hous give glimmer light , 
 by the dead and drowsi fire ; 
 everi elf and fairi sprite 
 hop as light as bird from brier ; 
 and thi ditti , after me , 
 sing and danc it trippingli . 
 titania . first , rehears your song by rote , 
 to each word a warbl note ; 
 hand in hand , with fairi grace , 
 will we sing , and bless thi place . 
 
 [ oberon lead , the fairi sing and danc ] 
 
 oberon . now , until the break of day , 
 through thi hous each fairi stray . 
 to the best bride-b will we , 
 which by us shall bless be ; 
 and the issu there creat 
 ever shall be fortun . 
 so shall all the coupl three 
 ever true in love be ; 
 and the blot of natur 's hand 
 shall not in their issu stand ; 
 never mole , hare-lip , nor scar , 
 nor mark prodigi , such as are 
 despis in nativ , 
 shall upon their children be . 
 with thi field-dew consecr , 
 everi fairi take hi gait , 
 and each sever chamber bless , 
 through thi palac , with sweet peac ; 
 and the owner of it blest 
 ever shall in safeti rest . 
 trip away ; make no stay ; 
 meet me all by break of day . exeunt all but puck 
 puck . if we shadow have offend , 
 think but thi , and all is mend , 
 that you have but slumb'r here 
 while these vision did appear . 
 and thi weak and idl theme , 
 no more yield but a dream , 
 gentl , do not reprehend . 
 if you pardon , we will mend . 
 and , as i am an honest puck , 
 if we have unearn luck 
 now to scape the serpent 's tongu , 
 we will make amend ere long ; 
 els the puck a liar call . 
 so , good night unto you all . 
 give me your hand , if we be friend , 
 and robin shall restor amend . exit 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 much ado about noth 
 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 king of franc 
 the duke of florenc 
 bertram , count of rousillon 
 lafeu , an old lord 
 parol , a follow of bertram 
 two french lord , serv with bertram 
 
 steward , servant to the countess of rousillon 
 lavach , a clown and servant to the countess of rousillon 
 a page , servant to the countess of rousillon 
 
 countess of rousillon , mother to bertram 
 helena , a gentlewoman protect by the countess 
 a widow of florenc . 
 diana , daughter to the widow 
 
 
 violenta , neighbour and friend to the widow 
 mariana , neighbour and friend to the widow 
 
 lord , offic , soldier , etc. , french and florentin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 rousillon ; pari ; florenc ; marseil 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 enter bertram , the countess of rousillon , helena , and lafeu , all in black 
 
 countess . in deliv my son from me , i buri a second husband . 
 bertram . and i in go , madam , weep o'er my father 's death anew ; 
 but i must attend hi majesti 's command , to whom i am now in 
 ward , evermor in subject . 
 lafeu . you shall find of the king a husband , madam ; you , sir , a 
 father . he that so gener is at all time good must of 
 necess hold hi virtu to you , whose worthi would stir it 
 up where it want , rather than lack it where there is such 
 abund . 
 countess . what hope is there of hi majesti 's amend ? 
 lafeu . he hath abandon 'd hi physician , madam ; under whose 
 practic he hath persecut time with hope , and find no other 
 advantag in the process but onli the lose of hope by time . 
 countess . thi young gentlewoman had a father- o , that 'had , ' how 
 sad a passag 't is ! -whose skill wa almost as great as hi 
 honesti ; had it stretch 'd so far , would have made natur 
 immort , and death should have play for lack of work . would , for 
 the king 's sake , he were live ! i think it would be the death of 
 the king 's diseas . 
 lafeu . how call 'd you the man you speak of , madam ? 
 countess . he wa famou , sir , in hi profess , and it wa hi 
 great right to be so- gerard de narbon . 
 lafeu . he wa excel inde , madam ; the king veri late spoke 
 of him admiringli and mourningli ; he wa skil enough to have 
 liv 'd still , if knowledg could be set up against mortal . 
 bertram . what is it , my good lord , the king languish of ? 
 lafeu . a fistula , my lord . 
 bertram . i heard not of it befor . 
 lafeu . i would it were not notori . wa thi gentlewoman the 
 daughter of gerard de narbon ? 
 countess . hi sole child , my lord , and bequeath to my 
 overlook . i have those hope of her good that her educ 
 promis ; her disposit she inherit , which make fair gift 
 fairer ; for where an unclean mind carri virtuou qualiti , 
 there commend go with pity-they are virtu and traitor 
 too . in her they are the better for their simpl ; she deriv 
 her honesti , and achiev her good . 
 lafeu . your commend , madam , get from her tear . 
 countess . 't is the best brine a maiden can season her prais in . 
 the remembr of her father never approach her heart but the 
 tyranni of her sorrow take all livelihood from her cheek . no 
 more of thi , helena ; go to , no more , lest it be rather thought 
 you affect a sorrow than to have- 
 helena . i do affect a sorrow inde , but i have it too . 
 lafeu . moder lament is the right of the dead : excess 
 grief the enemi to the live . 
 countess . if the live be enemi to the grief , the excess make it 
 soon mortal . 
 bertram . madam , i desir your holi wish . 
 lafeu . how understand we that ? 
 countess . be thou blest , bertram , and succeed thi father 
 in manner , as in shape ! thi blood and virtu 
 contend for empir in thee , and thi good 
 share with thi birthright ! love all , trust a few , 
 do wrong to none ; be abl for thine enemi 
 rather in power than use , and keep thi friend 
 under thi own life 's key ; be check 'd for silenc , 
 but never tax 'd for speech . what heaven more will , 
 that thee may furnish , and my prayer pluck down , 
 fall on thi head ! farewel . my lord , 
 't is an unseason 'd courtier ; good my lord , 
 advis him . 
 lafeu . he can not want the best 
 that shall attend hi love . 
 countess . heaven bless him ! farewel , bertram . exit 
 bertram . the best wish that can be forg 'd in your thought be 
 servant to you ! [ to helena ] be comfort to my mother , your 
 mistress , and make much of her . 
 lafeu . farewel , pretti ladi ; you must hold the credit of your 
 father . exeunt bertram and lafeu 
 helena . o , were that all ! i think not on my father ; 
 and these great tear grace hi remembr more 
 than those i shed for him . what wa he like ? 
 i have forgot him ; my imagin 
 carri no favour i n't but bertram 's . 
 i am undon ; there is no live , none , 
 if bertram be away . 'twere all one 
 that i should love a bright particular star 
 and think to wed it , he is so abov me . 
 in hi bright radianc and collater light 
 must i be comfort , not in hi sphere . 
 th ' ambit in my love thu plagu itself : 
 the hind that would be mate by the lion 
 must die for love . 't wa pretti , though a plagu , 
 to see him everi hour ; to sit and draw 
 hi arch brow , hi hawk eye , hi curl , 
 in our heart 's table-heart too capabl 
 of everi line and trick of hi sweet favour . 
 but now he 's gone , and my idolatr fanci 
 must sanctifi hi relic . who come here ? 
 
 enter parol 
 
 [ asid ] one that goe with him . i love him for hi sake ; 
 and yet i know him a notori liar , 
 think him a great way fool , sole a coward ; 
 yet these fix 'd evil sit so fit in him 
 that they take place when virtu 's steeli bone 
 look bleak i ' th ' cold wind ; withal , full oft we see 
 cold wisdom wait on superflu folli . 
 parol . save you , fair queen ! 
 helena . and you , monarch ! 
 parol . no . 
 helena . and no . 
 parol . are you medit on virgin ? 
 helena . ay . you have some stain of soldier in you ; let me ask you a 
 question . man is enemi to virgin ; how may we barricado it 
 against him ? 
 parol . keep him out . 
 helena . but he assail ; and our virgin , though valiant in the 
 defenc , yet is weak . unfold to us some warlik resist . 
 parol . there is none . man , set down befor you , will 
 undermin you and blow you up . 
 helena . bless our poor virgin from undermin and blowers-up ! 
 is there no militari polici how virgin might blow up men ? 
 parol . virgin be blown down , man will quicklier be blown 
 up ; marri , in blow him down again , with the breach yourselv 
 made , you lose your citi . it is not polit in the commonwealth 
 of natur to preserv virgin . loss of virgin is ration 
 increas ; and there wa never virgin got till virgin wa first 
 lost . that you were made of is metal to make virgin . virgin 
 by be onc lost may be ten time found ; by be ever kept , it 
 is ever lost . 't is too cold a companion ; away with't . 
 helena . i will stand for 't a littl , though therefor i die a 
 virgin . 
 parol . there 's littl can be said in 't ; 't is against the rule 
 of natur . to speak on the part of virgin is to accus your 
 mother ; which is most infal disobedi . he that hang 
 himself is a virgin ; virgin murder itself , and should be 
 buri in highway , out of all sanctifi limit , as a desper 
 offendress against natur . virgin breed mite , much like a 
 chees ; consum itself to the veri pare , and so die with 
 feed hi own stomach . besid , virgin is peevish , proud , 
 idl , made of self-lov , which is the most inhibit sin in the 
 canon . keep it not ; you can not choos but lose by't . out with't . 
 within ten year it will make itself ten , which is a goodli 
 increas ; and the princip itself not much the wors . away 
 with't . 
 helena . how might one do , sir , to lose it to her own like ? 
 parol . let me see . marri , ill to like him that ne'er it like . 
 't is a commod will lose the gloss with lie ; the longer kept , 
 the less worth . off with't while 't is vendibl ; answer the time 
 of request . virgin , like an old courtier , wear her cap out of 
 fashion , richli suit but unsuit ; just like the brooch and 
 the toothpick , which wear not now . your date is better in your 
 pie and your porridg than in your cheek . and your virgin , 
 your old virgin , is like one of our french wither 'd pear : it 
 look ill , it eat drili ; marri , 't is a wither 'd pear ; it wa 
 formerli better ; marri , yet 't is a wither 'd pear . will you 
 anyth with it ? 
 helena . not my virgin yet . 
 there shall your master have a thousand love , 
 a mother , and a mistress , and a friend , 
 a phoenix , captain , and an enemi , 
 a guid , a goddess , and a sovereign , 
 a counsellor , a traitress , and a dear ; 
 hi humbl ambit , proud humil , 
 hi jar concord , and hi discord dulcet , 
 hi faith , hi sweet disast ; with a world 
 of pretti , fond , adopti christendom 
 that blink cupid gossip . now shall he- 
 i know not what he shall . god send him well ! 
 the court 's a learning-plac , and he is one- 
 parol . what one , i ' faith ? 
 helena . that i wish well . 't is pity- 
 parol . what 's piti ? 
 helena . that wish well had not a bodi i n't 
 which might be felt ; that we , the poorer born , 
 whose baser star do shut us up in wish , 
 might with effect of them follow our friend 
 and show what we alon must think , which never 
 return us thank . 
 
 enter page 
 
 page . monsieur parol , my lord call for you . exit page 
 parol . littl helen , farewel ; if i can rememb thee , i will 
 think of thee at court . 
 helena . monsieur parol , you were born under a charit star . 
 parol . under mar , i . 
 helena . i especi think , under mar . 
 parol . whi under man ? 
 helena . the war hath so kept you under that you must need be born 
 under mar . 
 parol . when he wa predomin . 
 helena . when he wa retrograd , i think , rather . 
 parol . whi think you so ? 
 helena . you go so much backward when you fight . 
 parol . that 's for advantag . 
 helena . so is run away , when fear propos the safeti : but the 
 composit that your valour and fear make in you is a virtu of 
 a good wing , and i like the wear well . 
 parol . i am so full of busi i can not answer thee acut . i 
 will return perfect courtier ; in the which my instruct shall 
 serv to natur thee , so thou wilt be capabl of a courtier 's 
 counsel , and understand what advic shall thrust upon thee ; els 
 thou diest in thine unthank , and thine ignor make 
 thee away . farewel . when thou hast leisur , say thi prayer ; 
 when thou hast none , rememb thi friend . get thee a good 
 husband and use him as he use thee . so , farewel . 
 exit 
 helena . our remedi oft in ourselv do lie , 
 which we ascrib to heaven . the fate sky 
 give us free scope ; onli doth backward pull 
 our slow design when we ourselv are dull . 
 what power is it which mount my love so high , 
 that make me see , and can not feed mine eye ? 
 the mightiest space in fortun natur bring 
 to join like like , and kiss like nativ thing . 
 imposs be strang attempt to those 
 that weigh their pain in sens , and do suppos 
 what hath been can not be . who ever strove 
 to show her merit that did miss her love ? 
 the king 's disease-mi project may deceiv me , 
 but my intent are fix 'd , and will not leav me . exit 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 pari . the king 's palac 
 
 flourish of cornet . enter the king of franc , with letter , 
 and diver attend 
 
 king . the florentin and senoy are by th ' ear ; 
 have fought with equal fortun , and continu 
 a brave war . 
 first lord . so 't is report , sir . 
 king . nay , 't is most credibl . we here receiv it , 
 a certainti , vouch 'd from our cousin austria , 
 with caution , that the florentin will move us 
 for speedi aid ; wherein our dearest friend 
 prejud the busi , and would seem 
 to have us make denial . 
 first lord . hi love and wisdom , 
 approv 'd so to your majesti , may plead 
 for amplest credenc . 
 king . he hath arm 'd our answer , 
 and florenc is deni befor he come ; 
 yet , for our gentlemen that mean to see 
 the tuscan servic , freeli have they leav 
 to stand on either part . 
 second lord . it well may serv 
 a nurseri to our gentri , who are sick 
 for breath and exploit . 
 king . what 's he come here ? 
 
 enter bertram , lafeu , and parol 
 
 first lord . it is the count rousillon , my good lord , 
 young bertram . 
 king . youth , thou bear'st thi father 's face ; 
 frank natur , rather curiou than in hast , 
 hath well compo 'd thee . thi father 's moral part 
 mayst thou inherit too ! welcom to pari . 
 bertram . my thank and duti are your majesti 's . 
 king . i would i had that corpor sound now , 
 as when thi father and myself in friendship 
 first tri our soldiership . he did look far 
 into the servic of the time , and wa 
 discipl of the bravest . he last long ; 
 but on us both did haggish age steal on , 
 and wore us out of act . it much repair me 
 to talk of your good father . in hi youth 
 he had the wit which i can well observ 
 to-day in our young lord ; but they may jest 
 till their own scorn return to them unnot 
 ere they can hide their leviti in honour . 
 so like a courtier , contempt nor bitter 
 were in hi pride or sharp ; if they were , 
 hi equal had awak 'd them ; and hi honour , 
 clock to itself , knew the true minut when 
 except bid him speak , and at thi time 
 hi tongu obey 'd hi hand . who were below him 
 he us 'd as creatur of anoth place ; 
 and bow 'd hi emin top to their low rank , 
 make them proud of hi humil 
 in their poor prais he humbl . such a man 
 might be a copi to these younger time ; 
 which , follow well , would demonstr them now 
 but goer backward . 
 bertram . hi good remembr , sir , 
 lie richer in your thought than on hi tomb ; 
 so in approof live not hi epitaph 
 as in your royal speech . 
 king . would i were with him ! he would alway say- 
 methink i hear him now ; hi plausiv word 
 he scatter 'd not in ear , but graft them 
 to grow there , and to bear- 'let me not live'- 
 thi hi good melancholi oft began , 
 on the catastroph and heel of pastim , 
 when it wa out-'let me not live ' quoth he 
 'after my flame lack oil , to be the snuff 
 of younger spirit , whose apprehens sens 
 all but new thing disdain ; whose judgment are 
 mere father of their garment ; whose constanc 
 expir befor their fashion . ' thi he wish 'd . 
 i , after him , do after him wish too , 
 sinc i nor wax nor honey can bring home , 
 i quickli were dissolv from my hive , 
 to give some labour room . 
 second lord . you 're love , sir ; 
 they that least lend it you shall lack you first . 
 king . i fill a place , i know't . how long is't , count , 
 sinc the physician at your father 's die ? 
 he wa much fam 'd . 
 bertram . some six month sinc , my lord . 
 king . if he were live , i would tri him yet- 
 lend me an arm-th rest have worn me out 
 with sever applic . natur and sick 
 debat it at their leisur . welcom , count ; 
 my son 's no dearer . 
 bertram . thank your majesti . exeunt [ flourish ] 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 enter countess , steward , and clown 
 
 countess . i will now hear ; what say you of thi gentlewoman ? 
 steward . madam , the care i have had to even your content i wish 
 might be found in the calendar of my past endeavour ; for then we 
 wound our modesti , and make foul the clear of our deserv , 
 when of ourselv we publish them . 
 countess . what doe thi knave here ? get you gone , sirrah . the 
 complaint i have heard of you i do not all believ ; 't is my 
 slow that i do not , for i know you lack not folli to commit 
 them and have abil enough to make such knaveri your . 
 clown . 't is not unknown to you , madam , i am a poor fellow . 
 countess . well , sir . 
 clown . no , madam , 't is not so well that i am poor , though mani of 
 the rich are damn 'd ; but if i may have your ladyship 's good will 
 to go to the world , isbel the woman and i will do as we may . 
 countess . wilt thou need be a beggar ? 
 clown . i do beg your good will in thi case . 
 countess . in what case ? 
 clown . in isbel 's case and mine own . servic is no heritag ; and i 
 think i shall never have the bless of god till i have issu o ' 
 my bodi ; for they say bame are bless . 
 countess . tell me thi reason whi thou wilt marri . 
 clown . my poor bodi , madam , requir it . i am driven on by the 
 flesh ; and he must need go that the devil drive . 
 countess . is thi all your worship 's reason ? 
 clown . faith , madam , i have other holi reason , such as they are . 
 countess . may the world know them ? 
 clown . i have been , madam , a wick creatur , as you and all flesh 
 and blood are ; and , inde , i do marri that i may repent . 
 countess . thi marriag , sooner than thi wicked . 
 clown . i am out o ' friend , madam , and i hope to have friend for 
 my wife 's sake . 
 countess . such friend are thine enemi , knave . 
 clown . y'are shallow , madam-in great friend ; for the knave come 
 to do that for me which i am aweari of . he that ear my land 
 spare my team , and give me leav to in the crop . if i be hi 
 cuckold , he 's my drudg . he that comfort my wife is the 
 cherish of my flesh and blood ; he that cherish my flesh and 
 blood love my flesh and blood ; he that love my flesh and blood 
 is my friend ; ergo , he that kiss my wife is my friend . if men 
 could be content to be what they are , there were no fear in 
 marriag ; for young charbon the puritan and old poysam the 
 papist , howsome' their heart are sever 'd in religion , their 
 head are both one ; they may jowl horn togeth like ani deer 
 i ' th ' herd . 
 countess . wilt thou ever be a foul-mouth 'd and calumni knave ? 
 clown . a prophet i , madam ; and i speak the truth the next way : 
 
 for i the ballad will repeat , 
 which men full true shall find : 
 your marriag come by destini , 
 your cuckoo sing by kind . 
 
 countess . get you gone , sir ; i 'll talk with you more anon . 
 steward . may it pleas you , madam , that he bid helen come to you . 
 of her i am to speak . 
 countess . sirrah , tell my gentlewoman i would speak with her ; helen 
 i mean . 
 clown . [ sing ] 
 
 'wa thi fair face the caus ' quoth she 
 'whi the grecian sack troy ? 
 fond done , done fond , 
 wa thi king priam 's joy ? ' 
 with that she sigh as she stood , 
 with that she sigh as she stood , 
 and gave thi sentenc then : 
 'among nine bad if one be good , 
 among nine bad if one be good , 
 there 's yet one good in ten . ' 
 
 countess . what , one good in ten ? you corrupt the song , sirrah . 
 clown . one good woman in ten , madam , which is a purifi o ' th ' 
 song . would god would serv the world so all the year ! we 'd find 
 no fault with the tithe-woman , if i were the parson . one in ten , 
 quoth ' a ! an we might have a good woman born befor everi blaze 
 star , or at an earthquak , 'twould mend the lotteri well : a man 
 may draw hi heart out ere ' a pluck one . 
 countess . you 'll be gone , sir knave , and do as i command you . 
 clown . that man should be at woman 's command , and yet no hurt done ! 
 though honesti be no puritan , yet it will do no hurt ; it will 
 wear the surplic of humil over the black gown of a big heart . 
 i am go , forsooth . the busi is for helen to come hither . 
 exit 
 countess . well , now . 
 steward . i know , madam , you love your gentlewoman entir . 
 countess . faith i do . her father bequeath 'd her to me ; and she 
 herself , without other advantag , may law make titl to as 
 much love as she find . there is more owe her than is paid ; and 
 more shall be paid her than she 'll demand . 
 steward . madam , i wa veri late more near her than i think she 
 wish 'd me . alon she wa , and did commun to herself her own 
 word to her own ear ; she thought , i dare vow for her , they 
 touch 'd not ani stranger sens . her matter wa , she love your 
 son . fortun , she said , wa no goddess , that had put such 
 differ betwixt their two estat ; love no god , that would not 
 extend hi might onli where qualiti were level ; diana no queen 
 of virgin , that would suffer her poor knight surpri 'd without 
 rescu in the first assault , or ransom afterward . thi she 
 deliv 'd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er i heard 
 virgin exclaim in ; which i held my duti speedili to acquaint you 
 withal ; sithenc , in the loss that may happen , it concern you 
 someth to know it . 
 countess . you have discharg 'd thi honestli ; keep it to yourself . 
 mani likelihood inform 'd me of thi befor , which hung so 
 tott'r in the balanc that i could neither believ nor 
 misdoubt . pray you leav me . stall thi in your bosom ; and i 
 thank you for your honest care . i will speak with you further 
 anon . exit steward 
 
 enter helena 
 
 even so it wa with me when i wa young . 
 if ever we are natur 's , these are our ; thi thorn 
 doth to our rose of youth rightli belong ; 
 our blood to us , thi to our blood is born . 
 it is the show and seal of natur 's truth , 
 where love 's strong passion is impress 'd in youth . 
 by our remembr of day foregon , 
 such were our fault , or then we thought them none . 
 her eye is sick o n't ; i observ her now . 
 helena . what is your pleasur , madam ? 
 countess . you know , helen , 
 i am a mother to you . 
 helena . mine honour mistress . 
 countess . nay , a mother . 
 whi not a mother ? when i said ' a mother , ' 
 methought you saw a serpent . what 's in 'mother ' 
 that you start at it ? i say i am your mother , 
 and put you in the catalogu of those 
 that were enwomb mine . 't is often seen 
 adopt strive with natur , and choic breed 
 a nativ slip to us from foreign seed . 
 you ne'er oppress 'd me with a mother 's groan , 
 yet i express to you a mother 's care . 
 god 's merci , maiden ! doe it curd thi blood 
 to say i am thi mother ? what 's the matter , 
 that thi distemp messeng of wet , 
 the many-colour 'd iri , round thine eye ? 
 whi , that you are my daughter ? 
 helena . that i am not . 
 countess . i say i am your mother . 
 helena . pardon , madam . 
 the count rousillon can not be my brother : 
 i am from humbl , he from honour name ; 
 no note upon my parent , hi all nobl . 
 my master , my dear lord he is ; and i 
 hi servant live , and will hi vassal die . 
 he must not be my brother . 
 countess . nor i your mother ? 
 helena . you are my mother , madam ; would you were- 
 so that my lord your son were not my brother- 
 inde my mother ! or were you both our mother , 
 i care no more for than i do for heaven , 
 so i were not hi sister . ca n't no other , 
 but , i your daughter , he must be my brother ? 
 countess . ye , helen , you might be my daughter-in-law . 
 god shield you mean it not ! 'daughter ' and 'mother ' 
 so strive upon your puls . what ! pale again ? 
 my fear hath catch 'd your fond . now i see 
 the myst'ri of your loneli , and find 
 your salt tear ' head . now to all sens 't is gross 
 you love my son ; invent is asham 'd , 
 against the proclam of thi passion , 
 to say thou dost not . therefor tell me true ; 
 but tell me then , 't is so ; for , look , thi cheek 
 confess it , th ' one to th ' other ; and thine eye 
 see it so grossli shown in thi behaviour 
 that in their kind they speak it ; onli sin 
 and hellish obstinaci tie thi tongu , 
 that truth should be suspect . speak , is't so ? 
 if it be so , you have wound a goodli clew ; 
 if it be not , forswear't ; howe' , i charg thee , 
 as heaven shall work in me for thine avail , 
 to tell me truli . 
 helena . good madam , pardon me . 
 countess . do you love my son ? 
 helena . your pardon , nobl mistress . 
 countess . love you my son ? 
 helena . do not you love him , madam ? 
 countess . go not about ; my love hath i n't a bond 
 whereof the world take note . come , come , disclos 
 the state of your affect ; for your passion 
 have to the full appeach 'd . 
 helena . then i confess , 
 here on my knee , befor high heaven and you , 
 that befor you , and next unto high heaven , 
 i love your son . 
 my friend were poor , but honest ; so 's my love . 
 be not offend , for it hurt not him 
 that he is lov 'd of me ; i follow him not 
 by ani token of presumptu suit , 
 nor would i have him till i do deserv him ; 
 yet never know how that desert should be . 
 i know i love in vain , strive against hope ; 
 yet in thi captiou and inten siev 
 i still pour in the water of my love , 
 and lack not to lose still . thu , indian-lik , 
 religi in mine error , i ador 
 the sun that look upon hi worshipp 
 but know of him no more . my dearest madam , 
 let not your hate encount with my love , 
 for love where you do ; but if yourself , 
 whose age honour cite a virtuou youth , 
 did ever in so true a flame of like 
 wish chast and love dearli that your dian 
 wa both herself and love ; o , then , give piti 
 to her whose state is such that can not choos 
 but lend and give where she is sure to lose ; 
 that seek not to find that her search impli , 
 but , riddle-lik , live sweetli where she die ! 
 countess . had you not late an intent-speak truly- 
 to go to pari ? 
 helena . madam , i had . 
 countess . wherefor ? tell true . 
 helena . i will tell truth ; by grace itself i swear . 
 you know my father left me some prescript 
 of rare and prov 'd effect , such as hi read 
 and manifest experi had collect 
 for gener sovereignti ; and that he will 'd me 
 in heedfull'st reserv to bestow them , 
 as note whose faculti inclus were 
 more than they were in note . amongst the rest 
 there is a remedi , approv 'd , set down , 
 to cure the desper languish whereof 
 the king is render 'd lost . 
 countess . thi wa your motiv 
 for pari , wa it ? speak . 
 helena . my lord your son made me to think of thi , 
 els pari , and the medicin , and the king , 
 had from the convers of my thought 
 hapli been absent then . 
 countess . but think you , helen , 
 if you should tender your suppos aid , 
 he would receiv it ? he and hi physician 
 are of a mind : he , that they can not help him ; 
 they , that they can not help . how shall they credit 
 a poor unlearn virgin , when the school , 
 embowel 'd of their doctrin , have let off 
 the danger to itself ? 
 helena . there 's someth i n't 
 more than my father 's skill , which wa the great'st 
 of hi profess , that hi good receipt 
 shall for my legaci be sanctifi 
 by th ' luckiest star in heaven ; and , would your honour 
 but give me leav to tri success , i 'd ventur 
 the well-lost life of mine on hi grace 's cure . 
 by such a day and hour . 
 countess . dost thou believe't ? 
 helena . ay , madam , knowingli . 
 countess . whi , helen , thou shalt have my leav and love , 
 mean and attend , and my love greet 
 to those of mine in court . i 'll stay at home , 
 and pray god 's bless into thi attempt . 
 be gone to-morrow ; and be sure of thi , 
 what i can help thee to thou shalt not miss . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 pari . the king 's palac 
 
 flourish of cornet . enter the king with diver young lord take leav 
 for the florentin war ; bertram and parol ; attend 
 
 king . farewel , young lord ; these war-lik principl 
 do not throw from you . and you , my lord , farewel ; 
 share the advic betwixt you ; if both gain all , 
 the gift doth stretch itself as 't is receiv 'd , 
 and is enough for both . 
 first lord . 't is our hope , sir , 
 after well-ent'r soldier , to return 
 and find your grace in health . 
 king . no , no , it can not be ; and yet my heart 
 will not confess he owe the maladi 
 that doth my life besieg . farewel , young lord ; 
 whether i live or die , be you the son 
 of worthi frenchmen ; let higher italy- 
 those bate that inherit but the fall 
 of the last monarchy-se that you come 
 not to woo honour , but to wed it ; when 
 the bravest questant shrink , find what you seek , 
 that fame may cri you aloud . i say farewel . 
 second lord . health , at your bid , serv your majesti ! 
 king . those girl of itali , take heed of them ; 
 they say our french lack languag to deni , 
 if they demand ; bewar of be captiv 
 befor you serv . 
 both . our heart receiv your warn . 
 king . farewel . [ to attend ] come hither to me . 
 the king retir attend 
 first lord . o my sweet lord , that you will stay behind us ! 
 parol . 't is not hi fault , the spark . 
 second lord . o , 't is brave war ! 
 parol . most admir ! i have seen those war . 
 bertram . i am command here and kept a coil with 
 'too young ' and next year ' and `` ti too earli . ' 
 parol . an thi mind stand to 't , boy , steal away brave . 
 bertram . i shall stay here the forehors to a smock , 
 creak my shoe on the plain masonri , 
 till honour be bought up , and no sword worn 
 but one to danc with . by heaven , i 'll steal away . 
 first lord . there 's honour in the theft . 
 parol . commit it , count . 
 second lord . i am your accessari ; and so farewel . 
 bertram . i grow to you , and our part is a tortur 'd bodi . 
 first lord . farewel , captain . 
 second lord . sweet monsieur parol ! 
 parol . nobl hero , my sword and your are kin . good spark and 
 lustrou , a word , good metal : you shall find in the regiment of 
 the spinii one captain spurio , with hi cicatric , an emblem of 
 war , here on hi sinist cheek ; it wa thi veri sword 
 entrench 'd it . say to him i live ; and observ hi report for me . 
 first lord . we shall , nobl captain . 
 parol . mar dote on you for hi novic ! exeunt lord 
 what will ye do ? 
 
 re-ent the king 
 
 bertram . stay ; the king ! 
 parol . use a more spaciou ceremoni to the nobl lord ; you have 
 restrain 'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu . be more 
 express to them ; for they wear themselv in the cap of the 
 time ; there do muster true gait ; eat , speak , and move , under the 
 influenc of the most receiv 'd star ; and though the devil lead 
 the measur , such are to be follow . after them , and take a more 
 dilat farewel . 
 bertram . and i will do so . 
 parol . worthi fellow ; and like to prove most sinewi sword-men . 
 exeunt bertram and parol 
 
 enter lafeu 
 
 lafeu . [ kneel ] pardon , my lord , for me and for my tide . 
 king . i 'll fee thee to stand up . 
 lafeu . then here 's a man stand that ha brought hi pardon . 
 i would you had kneel 'd , my lord , to ask me merci ; 
 and that at my bid you could so stand up . 
 king . i would i had ; so i had broke thi pate , 
 and ask 'd thee merci for't . 
 lafeu . good faith , across ! 
 but , my good lord , 't is thu : will you be cur 'd 
 of your infirm ? 
 king . no . 
 lafeu . o , will you eat 
 no grape , my royal fox ? ye , but you will 
 my nobl grape , an if my royal fox 
 could reach them : i have seen a medicin 
 that 's abl to breath life into a stone , 
 quicken a rock , and make you danc canari 
 with sprite fire and motion ; whose simpl touch 
 is power to arais king pepin , nay , 
 to give great charlemain a pen in 's hand 
 and write to her a love-lin . 
 king . what her is thi ? 
 lafeu . whi , doctor she ! my lord , there 's one arriv 'd , 
 if you will see her . now , by my faith and honour , 
 if serious i may convey my thought 
 in thi my light deliver , i have spoke 
 with one that in her sex , her year , profess , 
 wisdom , and constanc , hath amaz 'd me more 
 than i dare blame my weak . will you see her , 
 for that is her demand , and know her busi ? 
 that done , laugh well at me . 
 king . now , good lafeu , 
 bring in the admir , that we with the 
 may spend our wonder too , or take off thine 
 by wond'r how thou took'st it . 
 lafeu . nay , i 'll fit you , 
 and not be all day neither . exit lafeu 
 king . thu he hi special noth ever prologu . 
 
 re-ent lafeu with helena 
 
 lafeu . nay , come your way . 
 king . thi hast hath wing inde . 
 lafeu . nay , come your way ; 
 thi is hi majesti ; say your mind to him . 
 a traitor you do look like ; but such traitor 
 hi majesti seldom fear . i am cressid 's uncl , 
 that dare leav two togeth . fare you well . exit 
 king . now , fair one , doe your busi follow us ? 
 helena . ay , my good lord . 
 gerard de narbon wa my father , 
 in what he did profess , well found . 
 king . i knew him . 
 helena . the rather will i spare my prais toward him ; 
 know him is enough . on 's bed of death 
 mani receipt he gave me ; chiefli one , 
 which , as the dearest issu of hi practic , 
 and of hi old experi th ' onli darl , 
 he bade me store up as a tripl eye , 
 safer than mine own two , more dear . i have so : 
 and , hear your high majesti is touch 'd 
 with that malign caus wherein the honour 
 of my dear father 's gift stand chief in power , 
 i come to tender it , and my applianc , 
 with all bound humbl . 
 king . we thank you , maiden ; 
 but may not be so credul of cure , 
 when our most learn doctor leav us , and 
 the congreg colleg have conclud 
 that labour art can never ransom natur 
 from her inaid estate-i say we must not 
 so stain our judgment , or corrupt our hope , 
 to prostitut our past-cur maladi 
 to empir ; or to dissev so 
 our great self and our credit to esteem 
 a senseless help , when help past sens we deem . 
 helena . my duti then shall pay me for my pain . 
 i will no more enforc mine offic on you ; 
 humbl entreat from your royal thought 
 a modest one to bear me back again . 
 king . i can not give thee less , to be call 'd grate . 
 thou thought'st to help me ; and such thank i give 
 as one near death to those that wish him live . 
 but what at full i know , thou know'st no part ; 
 i know all my peril , thou no art . 
 helena . what i can do can do no hurt to tri , 
 sinc you set up your rest 'gainst remedi . 
 he that of greatest work is finish 
 oft doe them by the weakest minist . 
 so holi writ in babe hath judgment shown , 
 when judg have been babe . great flood have flown 
 from simpl sourc , and great sea have dri 
 when miracl have by the greatest been deni . 
 oft expect fail , and most oft there 
 where most it promis ; and oft it hit 
 where hope is coldest , and despair most fit . 
 king . i must not hear thee . fare thee well , kind maid ; 
 thi pain , not us 'd , must by thyself be paid ; 
 proffer not took reap thank for their reward . 
 helena . inspir merit so by breath is barr 'd . 
 it is not so with him that all thing know , 
 as 't is with us that squar our guess by show ; 
 but most it is presumpt in us when 
 the help of heaven we count the act of men . 
 dear sir , to my endeavour give consent ; 
 of heaven , not me , make an experi . 
 i am not an impostor , that proclaim 
 myself against the level of mine aim ; 
 but know i think , and think i know most sure , 
 my art is not past power nor you past cure . 
 king . art thou so confid ? within what space 
 hop'st thou my cure ? 
 helena . the greatest grace lend grace . 
 ere twice the hors of the sun shall bring 
 their fieri torcher hi diurnal ring , 
 ere twice in murk and occident damp 
 moist hesperu hath quench 'd hi sleepi lamp , 
 or four and twenti time the pilot 's glass 
 hath told the thievish minut how they pass , 
 what is infirm from your sound part shall fli , 
 health shall live free , and sick freeli die . 
 king . upon thi certainti and confid 
 what dar'st thou ventur ? 
 helena . tax of impud , 
 a strumpet 's bold , a divulg shame , 
 traduc 'd by odiou ballad ; my maiden 's name 
 sear 'd otherwis ; ne wors of worst-extend 
 with vilest tortur let my life be end . 
 king . methink in thee some bless spirit doth speak 
 hi power sound within an organ weak ; 
 and what imposs would slay 
 in common sens , sens save anoth way . 
 thi life is dear ; for all that life can rate 
 worth name of life in thee hath estim : 
 youth , beauti , wisdom , courag , all 
 that happi and prime can happi call . 
 thou thi to hazard need must intim 
 skill infinit or monstrou desper . 
 sweet practis , thi physic i will tri , 
 that minist thine own death if i die . 
 helena . if i break time , or flinch in properti 
 of what i spoke , unpiti let me die ; 
 and well deserv 'd . not help , death 's my fee ; 
 but , if i help , what do you promis me ? 
 king . make thi demand . 
 helena . but will you make it even ? 
 king . ay , by my sceptr and my hope of heaven . 
 helena . then shalt thou give me with thi kingli hand 
 what husband in thi power i will command . 
 exempt be from me the arrog 
 to choos from forth the royal blood of franc , 
 my low and humbl name to propag 
 with ani branch or imag of thi state ; 
 but such a one , thi vassal , whom i know 
 is free for me to ask , thee to bestow . 
 king . here is my hand ; the premis observ 'd , 
 thi will by my perform shall be serv 'd . 
 so make the choic of thi own time , for i , 
 thi resolv 'd patient , on thee still reli . 
 more should i question thee , and more i must , 
 though more to know could not be more to trust , 
 from whenc thou cam'st , how tend on . but rest 
 unquest 'd welcom and undoubt blest . 
 give me some help here , ho ! if thou proceed 
 as high as word , my deed shall match thi deed . 
 [ flourish . exeunt ] 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 enter countess and clown 
 
 countess . come on , sir ; i shall now put you to the height of your 
 breed . 
 clown . i will show myself highli fed and lowli taught . i know my 
 busi is but to the court . 
 countess . to the court ! whi , what place make you special , when you 
 put off that with such contempt ? but to the court ! 
 clown . truli , madam , if god have lent a man ani manner , he may 
 easili put it off at court . he that can not make a leg , put off 's 
 cap , kiss hi hand , and say noth , ha neither leg , hand , lip , 
 nor cap ; and inde such a fellow , to say precis , were not for 
 the court ; but for me , i have an answer will serv all men . 
 countess . marri , that 's a bounti answer that fit all question . 
 clown . it is like a barber 's chair , that fit all buttocks-th pin 
 buttock , the quatch buttock , the brawn buttock , or ani buttock . 
 countess . will your answer serv fit to all question ? 
 clown . as fit as ten groat is for the hand of an attorney , as your 
 french crown for your taffeti punk , as tib 's rush for tom 's 
 forefing , as a pancak for shrove tuesday , a morri for mayday , 
 as the nail to hi hole , the cuckold to hi horn , as a scold 
 quean to a wrangl knave , as the nun 's lip to the friar 's 
 mouth ; nay , as the pud to hi skin . 
 countess . have you , i , say , an answer of such fit for all 
 question ? 
 clown . from below your duke to beneath your constabl , it will fit 
 ani question . 
 countess . it must be an answer of most monstrou size that must fit 
 all demand . 
 clown . but a trifl neither , in good faith , if the learn should 
 speak truth of it . here it is , and all that belong to't . ask me 
 if i am a courtier : it shall do you no harm to learn . 
 countess . to be young again , if we could , i will be a fool in 
 question , hope to be the wiser by your answer . i pray you , sir , 
 are you a courtier ? 
 clown . o lord , sir ! -there 's a simpl put off . more , more , a 
 hundr of them . 
 countess . sir , i am a poor friend of your , that love you . 
 clown . o lord , sir ! -thick , thick ; spare not me . 
 countess . i think , sir , you can eat none of thi home meat . 
 clown . o lord , sir ! -nay , put me to't , i warrant you . 
 countess . you were late whipp 'd , sir , as i think . 
 clown . o lord , sir ! -spare not me . 
 countess . do you cri ' o lord , sir ! ' at your whip , and 'spare 
 not me ' ? inde your ' o lord , sir ! ' is veri sequent to your 
 whip . you would answer veri well to a whip , if you were 
 but bound to't . 
 clown . i ne'er had wors luck in my life in my ' o lord , sir ! ' i see 
 thing 's may serv long , but not serv ever . 
 countess . i play the nobl housewif with the time , 
 to entertain it so merrili with a fool . 
 clown . o lord , sir ! -whi , there't serv well again . 
 countess . an end , sir ! to your busi : give helen thi , 
 and urg her to a present answer back ; 
 commend me to my kinsmen and my son . thi is not much . 
 clown . not much commend to them ? 
 countess . not much employ for you . you understand me ? 
 clown . most fruit ; i am there befor my leg . 
 countess . hast you again . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 pari . the king 's palac 
 
 enter bertram , lafeu , and parol 
 
 lafeu . they say miracl are past ; and we have our philosoph 
 person to make modern and familiar thing supernatur and 
 causeless . henc is it that we make trifl of terror , 
 ensconc ourselv into seem knowledg when we should submit 
 ourselv to an unknown fear . 
 parol . whi , 't is the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot 
 out in our latter time . 
 bertram . and so 't is . 
 lafeu . to be relinquish 'd of the artists- 
 parol . so i say-both of galen and paracelsu . 
 lafeu . of all the learn and authent fellows- 
 parol . right ; so i say . 
 lafeu . that gave him out incurable- 
 parol . whi , there 't is ; so say i too . 
 lafeu . not to be help'd- 
 parol . right ; as 'twere a man assur 'd of a- 
 lafeu . uncertain life and sure death . 
 parol . just ; you say well ; so would i have said . 
 lafeu . i may truli say it is a novelti to the world . 
 parol . it is inde . if you will have it in show , you shall 
 read it in what-do-ye-call't here . 
 lafeu . [ read the ballad titl ] ' a show of a heavenli 
 effect in an earthli actor . ' 
 parol . that 's it ; i would have said the veri same . 
 lafeu . whi , your dolphin is not lustier . 'fore me , i speak in 
 respect- 
 parol . nay , 't is strang , 't is veri strang ; that is the brief 
 and the tediou of it ; and he 's of a most facineri spirit that 
 will not acknowledg it to be the- 
 lafeu . veri hand of heaven . 
 parol . ay ; so i say . 
 lafeu . in a most weak- 
 parol . and debil minist , great power , great transcend ; 
 which should , inde , give us a further use to be made than alon 
 the recov'ri of the king , as to be- 
 lafeu . gener thank . 
 
 enter king , helena , and attend 
 
 parol . i would have said it ; you say well . here come the king . 
 lafeu . lustig , as the dutchman say . i 'll like a maid the better , 
 whilst i have a tooth in my head . whi , he 's abl to lead her a 
 coranto . 
 parol . mort du vinaigr ! is not thi helen ? 
 lafeu . 'fore god , i think so . 
 king . go , call befor me all the lord in court . 
 exit an attend 
 sit , my preserv , by thi patient 's side ; 
 and with thi health hand , whose banish 'd sens 
 thou ha repeal 'd , a second time receiv 
 the confirm of my promi 'd gift , 
 which but attend thi name . 
 
 enter three or four lord 
 
 fair maid , send forth thine eye . thi youth parcel 
 of nobl bachelor stand at my bestow , 
 o'er whom both sovereign power and father 's voic 
 i have to use . thi frank elect make ; 
 thou hast power to choos , and they none to forsak . 
 helena . to each of you one fair and virtuou mistress 
 fall , when love pleas . marri , to each but one ! 
 lafeu . i 'd give bay curtal and hi furnitur 
 my mouth no more were broken than these boy ' , 
 and writ as littl beard . 
 king . perus them well . 
 not one of those but had a nobl father . 
 helena . gentlemen , 
 heaven hath through me restor 'd the king to health . 
 all . we understand it , and thank heaven for you . 
 helena . i am a simpl maid , and therein wealthiest 
 that i protest i simpli am a maid . 
 pleas it your majesti , i have done alreadi . 
 the blush in my cheek thu whisper me : 
 'we blush that thou shouldst choos ; but , be refus , 
 let the white death sit on thi cheek for ever , 
 we 'll ne'er come there again . ' 
 king . make choic and see : 
 who shun thi love shun all hi love in me . 
 helena . now , dian , from thi altar do i fli , 
 and to imperi love , that god most high , 
 do my sigh stream . sir , will you hear my suit ? 
 first lord . and grant it . 
 helena . thank , sir ; all the rest is mute . 
 lafeu . i had rather be in thi choic than throw ames-ac for my 
 life . 
 helena . the honour , sir , that flame in your fair eye , 
 befor i speak , too threat'ningli repli . 
 love make your fortun twenti time abov 
 her that so wish , and her humbl love ! 
 second lord . no better , if you pleas . 
 helena . my wish receiv , 
 which great love grant ; and so i take my leav . 
 lafeu . do all they deni her ? an they were son of mine i 'd have 
 them whipt ; or i would send them to th ' turk to make eunuch of . 
 helena . be not afraid that i your hand should take ; 
 i 'll never do you wrong for your own sake . 
 bless upon your vow ; and in your bed 
 find fairer fortun , if you ever wed ! 
 lafeu . these boy are boy of ice ; they 'll none have her . 
 sure , they are bastard to the english ; the french ne'er got 'em . 
 helena . you are too young , too happi , and too good , 
 to make yourself a son out of my blood . 
 fourth lord . fair one , i think not so . 
 lafeu . there 's one grape yet ; i am sure thi father drunk wine-but 
 if thou be'st not an ass , i am a youth of fourteen ; i have known 
 thee alreadi . 
 helena . [ to bertram ] i dare not say i take you ; but i give 
 me and my servic , ever whilst i live , 
 into your guid power . thi is the man . 
 king . whi , then , young bertram , take her ; she 's thi wife . 
 bertram . my wife , my lieg ! i shall beseech your high , 
 in such a busi give me leav to use 
 the help of mine own eye . 
 king . know'st thou not , bertram , 
 what she ha done for me ? 
 bertram . ye , my good lord ; 
 but never hope to know whi i should marri her . 
 king . thou know'st she ha rai 'd me from my sickli bed . 
 bertram . but follow it , my lord , to bring me down 
 must answer for your rais ? i know her well : 
 she had her breed at my father 's charg . 
 a poor physician 's daughter my wife ! disdain 
 rather corrupt me ever ! 
 king . 't is onli titl thou disdain'st in her , the which 
 i can build up . strang is it that our blood , 
 of colour , weight , and heat , pour 'd all togeth , 
 would quit confound distinct , yet stand off 
 in differ so mighti . if she be 
 all that is virtuous-sav what thou dislik'st , 
 a poor physician 's daughter-th dislik'st 
 of virtu for the name ; but do not so . 
 from lowest place when virtuou thing proceed , 
 the place is dignifi by the doer 's deed ; 
 where great addit swell 's , and virtu none , 
 it is a dropsi honour . good alon 
 is good without a name . vile is so : 
 the properti by what it is should go , 
 not by the titl . she is young , wise , fair ; 
 in these to natur she 's immedi heir ; 
 and these breed honour . that is honour 's scorn 
 which challeng itself as honour 's born 
 and is not like the sire . honour thrive 
 when rather from our act we them deriv 
 than our fore-go . the mere word 's a slave , 
 debauch 'd on everi tomb , on everi grave 
 a lie trophi ; and as oft is dumb 
 where dust and damn 'd oblivion is the tomb 
 of honour 'd bone inde . what should be said ? 
 if thou canst like thi creatur as a maid , 
 i can creat the rest . virtu and she 
 is her own dower ; honour and wealth from me . 
 bertram . i can not love her , nor will strive to do 't . 
 king . thou wrong'st thyself , if thou shouldst strive to choos . 
 helena . that you are well restor 'd , my lord , i 'm glad . 
 let the rest go . 
 king . my honour 's at the stake ; which to defeat , 
 i must produc my power . here , take her hand , 
 proud scorn boy , unworthi thi good gift , 
 that dost in vile mispris shackl up 
 my love and her desert ; that canst not dream 
 we , pois us in her defect scale , 
 shall weigh thee to the beam ; that wilt not know 
 it is in us to plant thine honour where 
 we pleas to have it grow . check thi contempt ; 
 obey our will , which travail in thi good ; 
 believ not thi disdain , but present 
 do thine own fortun that obedi right 
 which both thi duti owe and our power claim ; 
 or i will throw thee from my care for ever 
 into the stagger and the careless laps 
 of youth and ignor ; both my reveng and hate 
 loos upon thee in the name of justic , 
 without all term of piti . speak ; thine answer . 
 bertram . pardon , my graciou lord ; for i submit 
 my fanci to your eye . when i consid 
 what great creation and what dole of honour 
 fli where you bid it , i find that she which late 
 wa in my nobler thought most base is now 
 the prais of the king ; who , so ennobl , 
 is as 'twere born so . 
 king . take her by the hand , 
 and tell her she is thine ; to whom i promis 
 a counterpois , if not to thi estat 
 a balanc more replet . 
 bertram . i take her hand . 
 king . good fortun and the favour of the king 
 smile upon thi contract ; whose ceremoni 
 shall seem expedi on the now-born brief , 
 and be perform 'd to-night . the solemn feast 
 shall more attend upon the come space , 
 expect absent friend . as thou lov'st her , 
 thi love 's to me religi ; els , doe err . 
 exeunt all but lafeu and parol who stay behind , 
 comment of thi wed 
 lafeu . do you hear , monsieur ? a word with you . 
 parol . your pleasur , sir ? 
 lafeu . your lord and master did well to make hi recant . 
 parol . recant ! my lord ! my master ! 
 lafeu . ay ; is it not a languag i speak ? 
 parol . a most harsh one , and not to be understood without bloodi 
 succeed . my master ! 
 lafeu . are you companion to the count rousillon ? 
 parol . to ani count ; to all count ; to what is man . 
 lafeu . to what is count 's man : count 's master is of anoth style . 
 parol . you are too old , sir ; let it satisfi you , you are too 
 old . 
 lafeu . i must tell thee , sirrah , i write man ; to which titl age 
 can not bring thee . 
 parol . what i dare too well do , i dare not do . 
 lafeu . i did think thee , for two ordinari , to be a pretti wise 
 fellow ; thou didst make toler vent of thi travel ; it might 
 pass . yet the scarf and the banneret about thee did manifoldli 
 dissuad me from believ thee a vessel of too great a burden . i 
 have now found thee ; when i lose thee again i care not ; yet art 
 thou good for noth but take up ; and that thou'rt scarc 
 worth . 
 parol . hadst thou not the privileg of antiqu upon thee- 
 lafeu . do not plung thyself too far in anger , lest thou hasten thi 
 trial ; which if-lord have merci on thee for a hen ! so , my good 
 window of lattic , fare thee well ; thi casement i need not open , 
 for i look through thee . give me thi hand . 
 parol . my lord , you give me most egregi indign . 
 lafeu . ay , with all my heart ; and thou art worthi of it . 
 parol . i have not , my lord , deserv 'd it . 
 lafeu . ye , good faith , ev'ri dram of it ; and i will not bate thee 
 a scrupl . 
 parol . well , i shall be wiser . 
 lafeu . ev'n as soon as thou canst , for thou hast to pull at a smack 
 o ' th ' contrari . if ever thou be'st bound in thi scarf and 
 beaten , thou shalt find what it is to be proud of thi bondag . i 
 have a desir to hold my acquaint with thee , or rather my 
 knowledg , that i may say in the default 'he is a man i know . ' 
 parol . my lord , you do me most insupport vexat . 
 lafeu . i would it were hell pain for thi sake , and my poor do 
 etern ; for do i am past , as i will by thee , in what motion 
 age will give me leav . exit 
 parol . well , thou hast a son shall take thi disgrac off me : 
 scurvi , old , filthi , scurvi lord ! well , i must be patient ; there 
 is no fetter of author . i 'll beat him , by my life , if i can 
 meet him with ani conveni , an he were doubl and doubl a 
 lord . i 'll have no more piti of hi age than i would have of- 
 i 'll beat him , and if i could but meet him again . 
 
 re-ent lafeu 
 
 lafeu . sirrah , your lord and master 's marri ; there 's news for 
 you ; you have a new mistress . 
 parol . i most unfeignedli beseech your lordship to make some 
 reserv of your wrong . he is my good lord : whom i serv 
 abov is my master . 
 lafeu . who ? god ? 
 parol . ay , sir . 
 lafeu . the devil it is that 's thi master . whi dost thou garter up 
 thi arm o ' thi fashion ? dost make hose of thi sleev ? do other 
 servant so ? thou wert best set thi lower part where thi nose 
 stand . by mine honour , if i were but two hour younger , i 'd beat 
 thee . methink'st thou art a gener offenc , and everi man should 
 beat thee . i think thou wast creat for men to breath 
 themselv upon thee . 
 parol . thi is hard and undeserv measur , my lord . 
 lafeu . go to , sir ; you were beaten in itali for pick a kernel 
 out of a pomegran ; you are a vagabond , and no true travel ; 
 you are more sauci with lord and honour personag than the 
 commiss of your birth and virtu give you heraldri . you are 
 not worth anoth word , els i 'd call you knave . i leav you . 
 exit 
 
 enter bertram 
 
 parol . good , veri , good , it is so then . good , veri good ; let it 
 be conceal 'd awhil . 
 bertram . undon , and forfeit to care for ever ! 
 parol . what 's the matter , sweetheart ? 
 bertram . although befor the solemn priest i have sworn , 
 i will not bed her . 
 parol . what , what , sweetheart ? 
 bertram . o my parol , they have marri me ! 
 i 'll to the tuscan war , and never bed her . 
 parol . franc is a dog-hol , and it no more merit 
 the tread of a man 's foot . to th ' war ! 
 bertram . there 's letter from my mother ; what th ' import is i know 
 not yet . 
 parol . ay , that would be known . to th ' war , my boy , to th ' 
 war ! 
 he wear hi honour in a box unseen 
 that hug hi kicky-wicki here at home , 
 spend hi manli marrow in her arm , 
 which should sustain the bound and high curvet 
 of mar 's fieri steed . to other region ! 
 franc is a stabl ; we that dwell i n't jade ; 
 therefor , to th ' war ! 
 bertram . it shall be so ; i 'll send her to my hous , 
 acquaint my mother with my hate to her , 
 and wherefor i am fled ; write to the king 
 that which i durst not speak . hi present gift 
 shall furnish me to those italian field 
 where nobl fellow strike . war is no strife 
 to the dark hous and the detest wife . 
 parol . will thi capriccio hold in thee , art sure ? 
 bertram . go with me to my chamber and advis me . 
 i 'll send her straight away . to-morrow 
 i 'll to the war , she to her singl sorrow . 
 parol . whi , these ball bound ; there 's nois in it . 't is hard : 
 a young man marri is a man that 's marr 'd . 
 therefor away , and leav her brave ; go . 
 the king ha done you wrong ; but , hush , 't is so . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 pari . the king 's palac 
 
 enter helena and clown 
 
 helena . my mother greet me kindli ; is she well ? 
 clown . she is not well , but yet she ha her health ; she 's veri 
 merri , but yet she is not well . but thank be given , she 's veri 
 well , and want noth i ' th ' world ; but yet she is not well . 
 helena . if she be veri well , what doe she ail that she 's not veri 
 well ? 
 clown . truli , she 's veri well inde , but for two thing . 
 helena . what two thing ? 
 clown . one , that she 's not in heaven , whither god send her quickli ! 
 the other , that she 's in earth , from whenc god send her quickli ! 
 
 enter parol 
 
 parol . bless you , my fortun ladi ! 
 helena . i hope , sir , i have your good will to have mine own good 
 fortun . 
 parol . you had my prayer to lead them on ; and to keep them on , 
 have them still . o , my knave , how doe my old ladi ? 
 clown . so that you had her wrinkl and i her money , i would she 
 did as you say . 
 parol . whi , i say noth . 
 clown . marri , you are the wiser man ; for mani a man 's tongu shake 
 out hi master 's undo . to say noth , to do noth , to know 
 noth , and to have noth , is to be a great part of your 
 titl , which is within a veri littl of noth . 
 parol . away ! th'art a knave . 
 clown . you should have said , sir , 'befor a knave th'art a knave ' ; 
 that 's 'befor me th'art a knave . ' thi had been truth , sir . 
 parol . go to , thou art a witti fool ; i have found thee . 
 clown . did you find me in yourself , sir , or were you taught to find 
 me ? the search , sir , wa profit ; and much fool may you find 
 in you , even to the world 's pleasur and the increas of 
 laughter . 
 parol . a good knave , i ' faith , and well fed . 
 madam , my lord will go away to-night : 
 a veri seriou busi call on him . 
 the great prerog and rite of love , 
 which , as your due , time claim , he doe acknowledg ; 
 but put it off to a compel 'd restraint ; 
 whose want , and whose delay , is strew 'd with sweet , 
 which they distil now in the curb time , 
 to make the come hour o'erflow with joy 
 and pleasur drown the brim . 
 helena . what 's hi els ? 
 parol . that you will take your instant leav o ' th ' king , 
 and make thi hast as your own good proceed , 
 strength'n with what apolog you think 
 may make it probabl need . 
 helena . what more command he ? 
 parol . that , have thi obtain 'd , you present 
 attend hi further pleasur . 
 helena . in everyth i wait upon hi will . 
 parol . i shall report it so . 
 helena . i pray you . exit parol 
 come , sirrah . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 pari . the king 's palac 
 
 enter lafeu and bertram 
 
 lafeu . but i hope your lordship think not him a soldier . 
 bertram . ye , my lord , and of veri valiant approof . 
 lafeu . you have it from hi own deliver . 
 bertram . and by other warrant testimoni . 
 lafeu . then my dial goe not true ; i took thi lark for a bunt . 
 bertram . i do assur you , my lord , he is veri great in knowledg , 
 and accordingli valiant . 
 lafeu . i have then sinn 'd against hi experi and transgress 'd 
 against hi valour ; and my state that way is danger , sinc i 
 can not yet find in my heart to repent . here he come ; i pray you 
 make us friend ; i will pursu the amiti 
 
 enter parol 
 
 parol . [ to bertram ] these thing shall be done , sir . 
 lafeu . pray you , sir , who 's hi tailor ? 
 parol . sir ! 
 lafeu . o , i know him well . ay , sir ; he , sir , 's a good workman , a 
 veri good tailor . 
 bertram . [ asid to parol ] is she gone to the king ? 
 parol . she is . 
 bertram . will she away to-night ? 
 parol . as you 'll have her . 
 bertram . i have writ my letter , casket my treasur , 
 given order for our hors ; and to-night , 
 when i should take possess of the bride , 
 end ere i do begin . 
 lafeu . a good travel is someth at the latter end of a dinner ; 
 but one that lie three-third and use a known truth to pass a 
 thousand noth with , should be onc heard and thrice beaten . 
 god save you , captain . 
 bertram . is there ani unkind between my lord and you , monsieur ? 
 parol . i know not how i have deserv to run into my lord 's 
 displeasur . 
 lafeu . you have made shift to run into 't , boot and spur and all , 
 like him that leapt into the custard ; and out of it you 'll run 
 again , rather than suffer question for your resid . 
 bertram . it may be you have mistaken him , my lord . 
 lafeu . and shall do so ever , though i took him at 's prayer . 
 fare you well , my lord ; and believ thi of me : there can be no 
 kernal in thi light nut ; the soul of thi man is hi cloth ; 
 trust him not in matter of heavi consequ ; i have kept of them 
 tame , and know their natur . farewel , monsieur ; i have spoken 
 better of you than you have or will to deserv at my hand ; but we 
 must do good against evil . exit 
 parol . an idl lord , i swear . 
 bertram . i think so . 
 parol . whi , do you not know him ? 
 bertram . ye , i do know him well ; and common speech 
 give him a worthi pass . here come my clog . 
 
 enter helena 
 
 helena . i have , sir , as i wa command from you , 
 spoke with the king , and have procur 'd hi leav 
 for present part ; onli he desir 
 some privat speech with you . 
 bertram . i shall obey hi will . 
 you must not marvel , helen , at my cours , 
 which hold not colour with the time , nor doe 
 the ministr and requir offic 
 on my particular . prepar 'd i wa not 
 for such a busi ; therefor am i found 
 so much unsettl . thi drive me to entreat you 
 that present you take your way for home , 
 and rather muse than ask whi i entreat you ; 
 for my respect are better than they seem , 
 and my appoint have in them a need 
 greater than show itself at the first view 
 to you that know them not . thi to my mother . 
 [ give a letter ] 
 'twill be two day ere i shall see you ; so 
 i leav you to your wisdom . 
 helena . sir , i can noth say 
 but that i am your most obedi servant . 
 bertram . come , come , no more of that . 
 helena . and ever shall 
 with true observ seek to eke out that 
 wherein toward me my home star have fail 'd 
 to equal my great fortun . 
 bertram . let that go . 
 my hast is veri great . farewel ; hie home . 
 helena . pray , sir , your pardon . 
 bertram . well , what would you say ? 
 helena . i am not worthi of the wealth i owe , 
 nor dare i say 't is mine , and yet it is ; 
 but , like a timor thief , most fain would steal 
 what law doe vouch mine own . 
 bertram . what would you have ? 
 helena . someth ; and scarc so much ; noth , inde . 
 i would not tell you what i would , my lord . 
 faith , ye : 
 stranger and foe do sunder and not kiss . 
 bertram . i pray you , stay not , but in hast to hors . 
 helena . i shall not break your bid , good my lord . 
 bertram . where are my other men , monsieur ? 
 farewel ! exit helena 
 go thou toward home , where i will never come 
 whilst i can shake my sword or hear the drum . 
 away , and for our flight . 
 parol . brave , coragio ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 florenc . the duke 's palac 
 
 flourish . enter the duke of florenc , attend ; two 
 french lord , with a troop of soldier 
 
 duke . so that , from point to point , now have you hear 
 the fundament reason of thi war ; 
 whose great decis hath much blood let forth 
 and more thirst after . 
 first lord . holi seem the quarrel 
 upon your grace 's part ; black and fear 
 on the oppos . 
 duke . therefor we marvel much our cousin franc 
 would in so just a busi shut hi bosom 
 against our borrow prayer . 
 second lord . good my lord , 
 the reason of our state i can not yield , 
 but like a common and an outward man 
 that the great figur of a council frame 
 by self-un motion ; therefor dare not 
 say what i think of it , sinc i have found 
 myself in my incertain ground to fail 
 as often as i guess 'd . 
 duke . be it hi pleasur . 
 first lord . but i am sure the younger of our natur , 
 that surfeit on their eas , will day by day 
 come here for physic . 
 duke . welcom shall they be 
 and all the honour that can fli from us 
 shall on them settl . you know your place well ; 
 when better fall , for your avail they fell . 
 to-morrow to th ' field . flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 enter countess and clown 
 
 countess . it hath happen 'd all as i would have had it , save that he 
 come not along with her . 
 clown . by my troth , i take my young lord to be a veri melancholi 
 man . 
 countess . by what observ , i pray you ? 
 clown . whi , he will look upon hi boot and sing ; mend the ruff and 
 sing ; ask question and sing ; pick hi teeth and sing . i know a 
 man that had thi trick of melancholi sold a goodli manor for a 
 song . 
 countess . let me see what he write , and when he mean to come . 
 [ open a letter ] 
 clown . i have no mind to isbel sinc i wa at court . our old ling 
 and our isbel o ' th ' countri are noth like your old ling and 
 your isbel o ' th ' court . the brain of my cupid 's knock 'd out ; 
 and i begin to love , as an old man love money , with no stomach . 
 countess . what have we here ? 
 clown . e'en that you have there . exit 
 countess . [ read ] ' i have sent you a daughter-in-law ; she hath 
 recov the king and undon me . i have wed her , not bed 
 her ; and sworn to make the `` not '' etern . you shall hear i am run 
 away ; know it befor the report come . if there be breadth enough 
 in the world , i will hold a long distanc . my duti to you . 
 your unfortun son , 
 bertram . ' 
 thi is not well , rash and unbridl boy , 
 to fli the favour of so good a king , 
 to pluck hi indign on thi head 
 by the mispriz of a maid too virtuou 
 for the contempt of empir . 
 
 re-ent clown 
 
 clown . o madam , yonder is heavi news within between two soldier 
 and my young ladi . 
 countess . what is the -matter ? 
 clown . nay , there is some comfort in the news , some comfort ; your 
 son will not be kill 'd so soon as i thought he would . 
 countess . whi should he be kill 'd ? 
 clown . so say i , madam , if he run away , as i hear he doe the 
 danger is in stand to 't ; that 's the loss of men , though it be 
 the get of children . here they come will tell you more . for my 
 part , i onli hear your son wa run away . exit 
 
 enter helena and the two french gentlemen 
 
 second gentleman . save you , good madam . 
 helena . madam , my lord is gone , for ever gone . 
 first gentleman . do not say so . 
 countess . think upon patienc . pray you , gentlemen- 
 i have felt so mani quirk of joy and grief 
 that the first face of neither , on the start , 
 can woman me unto 't . where is my son , i pray you ? 
 first gentleman . madam , he 's gone to serv the duke of florenc . 
 we met him thitherward ; for thenc we came , 
 and , after some dispatch in hand at court , 
 thither we bend again . 
 helena . look on thi letter , madam ; here 's my passport . 
 [ read ] 'when thou canst get the ring upon my finger , which 
 never shall come off , and show me a child begotten of thi bodi 
 that i am father to , then call me husband ; but in such a `` then '' i 
 write a `` never . '' 
 thi is a dread sentenc . 
 countess . brought you thi letter , gentlemen ? 
 first gentleman . ay , madam ; 
 and for the content ' sake are sorri for our pain . 
 countess . i prithe , ladi , have a better cheer ; 
 if thou engrossest all the grief are thine , 
 thou robb'st me of a moieti . he wa my son ; 
 but i do wash hi name out of my blood , 
 and thou art all my child . toward florenc is he ? 
 first gentleman . ay , madam . 
 countess . and to be a soldier ? 
 first gentleman . such is hi nobl purpos ; and , believ 't , 
 the duke will lay upon him all the honour 
 that good conveni claim . 
 countess . return you thither ? 
 second gentleman . ay , madam , with the swiftest wing of speed . 
 helena . [ read ] 'till i have no wife , i have noth in franc . ' 
 't is bitter . 
 countess . find you that there ? 
 helena . ay , madam . 
 second gentleman . 't is but the bold of hi hand hapli , which 
 hi heart wa not consent to . 
 countess . noth in franc until he have no wife ! 
 there 's noth here that is too good for him 
 but onli she ; and she deserv a lord 
 that twenti such rude boy might tend upon , 
 and call her hourli mistress . who wa with him ? 
 second gentleman . a servant onli , and a gentleman 
 which i have sometim known . 
 countess . parol , wa it not ? 
 second gentleman . ay , my good ladi , he . 
 countess . a veri taint fellow , and full of wicked . 
 my son corrupt a well-deriv natur 
 with hi induc . 
 second gentleman . inde , good ladi , 
 the fellow ha a deal of that too much 
 which hold him much to have . 
 countess . y'are welcom , gentlemen . 
 i will entreat you , when you see my son , 
 to tell him that hi sword can never win 
 the honour that he lose . more i 'll entreat you 
 written to bear along . 
 first gentleman . we serv you , madam , 
 in that and all your worthiest affair . 
 countess . not so , but as we chang our courtesi . 
 will you draw near ? exeunt countess and gentlemen 
 helena . 'till i have no wife , i have noth in franc . ' 
 noth in franc until he ha no wife ! 
 thou shalt have none , rousillon , none in franc 
 then hast thou all again . poor lord ! is't 
 that chase thee from thi countri , and expos 
 those tender limb of thine to the event 
 of the non-spar war ? and is it i 
 that drive thee from the sportiv court , where thou 
 wast shot at with fair eye , to be the mark 
 of smoki musket ? o you leaden messeng , 
 that ride upon the violent speed of fire , 
 fli with fals aim ; move the still-piec air , 
 that sing with pierc ; do not touch my lord . 
 whoever shoot at him , i set him there ; 
 whoever charg on hi forward breast , 
 i am the caitiff that do hold him to't ; 
 and though i kill him not , i am the caus 
 hi death wa so effect . better 'twere 
 i met the ravin lion when he roar 'd 
 with sharp constraint of hunger ; better 'twere 
 that all the miseri which natur owe 
 were mine at onc . no ; come thou home , rousillon , 
 whenc honour but of danger win a scar , 
 as oft it lose all . i will be gone . 
 my be here it is that hold thee henc . 
 shall i stay here to do 't ? no , no , although 
 the air of paradis did fan the hous , 
 and angel offic 'd all . i will be gone , 
 that piti rumour may report my flight 
 to consol thine ear . come , night ; end , day . 
 for with the dark , poor thief , i 'll steal away . exit 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 florenc . befor the duke 's palac 
 
 flourish . enter the duke of florenc , bertram , parol , soldier , 
 drum and trumpet 
 
 duke . the gener of our hors thou art ; and we , 
 great in our hope , lay our best love and credenc 
 upon thi promis fortun . 
 bertram . sir , it is 
 a charg too heavi for my strength ; but yet 
 we 'll strive to bear it for your worthi sake 
 to th ' extrem edg of hazard . 
 duke . then go thou forth ; 
 and fortun play upon thi prosper helm , 
 as thi auspici mistress ! 
 bertram . thi veri day , 
 great mar , i put myself into thi file ; 
 make me but like my thought , and i shall prove 
 a lover of thi drum , hater of love . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 enter countess and steward 
 
 countess . ala ! and would you take the letter of her ? 
 might you not know she would do as she ha done 
 by send me a letter ? read it again . 
 steward . [ read ] ' i am saint jaqu ' pilgrim , thither gone . 
 ambiti love hath so in me offend 
 that barefoot plod i the cold ground upon , 
 with saint vow my fault to have amend . 
 write , write , that from the bloodi cours of war 
 my dearest master , your dear son , may hie . 
 bless him at home in peac , whilst i from far 
 hi name with zealou fervour sanctifi . 
 hi taken labour bid him me forgiv ; 
 i , hi despit juno , sent him forth 
 from courtli friend , with camp foe to live , 
 where death and danger dog the heel of worth . 
 he is too good and fair for death and me ; 
 whom i myself embrac to set him free . ' 
 countess . ah , what sharp sting are in her mildest word ! 
 rinaldo , you did never lack advic so much 
 as let her pass so ; had i spoke with her , 
 i could have well divert her intent , 
 which thu she hath prevent . 
 steward . pardon me , madam ; 
 if i had given you thi at over-night , 
 she might have been o'er ta'en ; and yet she write 
 pursuit would be but vain . 
 countess . what angel shall 
 bless thi unworthi husband ? he can not thrive , 
 unless her prayer , whom heaven delight to hear 
 and love to grant , repriev him from the wrath 
 of greatest justic . write , write , rinaldo , 
 to thi unworthi husband of hi wife ; 
 let everi word weigh heavi of her worth 
 that he doe weigh too light . my greatest grief , 
 though littl he do feel it , set down sharpli . 
 dispatch the most conveni messeng . 
 when hapli he shall hear that she is gone 
 he will return ; and hope i may that she , 
 hear so much , will speed her foot again , 
 led hither by pure love . which of them both 
 is dearest to me i have no skill in sens 
 to make distinct . provid thi messeng . 
 my heart is heavi , and mine age is weak ; 
 grief would have tear , and sorrow bid me speak . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 
 without the wall of florenc 
 a tucket afar off . enter an old widow of florenc , her daughter diana , 
 violenta , and mariana , with other citizen 
 
 widow . nay , come ; for if they do approach the citi we shall lose 
 all the sight . 
 diana . they say the french count ha done most honour servic . 
 widow . it is report that he ha taken their great'st command ; 
 and that with hi own hand he slew the duke 's brother . [ tucket ] 
 we have lost our labour ; they are gone a contrari way . hark ! you 
 may know by their trumpet . 
 mariana . come , let 's return again , and suffic ourselv with the 
 report of it . well , diana , take heed of thi french earl ; the 
 honour of a maid is her name , and no legaci is so rich as 
 honesti . 
 widow . i have told my neighbour how you have been solicit by a 
 gentleman hi companion . 
 mariana . i know that knave , hang him ! one parol ; a filthi 
 offic he is in those suggest for the young earl . bewar of 
 them , diana : their promis , entic , oath , token , and all 
 these engin of lust , are not the thing they go under ; mani a 
 maid hath been seduc by them ; and the miseri is , exampl , that 
 so terribl show in the wreck of maidenhood , can not for all that 
 dissuad success , but that they are lime with the twig that 
 threaten them . i hope i need not to advis you further ; but i 
 hope your own grace will keep you where you are , though there 
 were no further danger known but the modesti which is so lost . 
 diana . you shall not need to fear me . 
 
 enter helena in the dress of a pilgrim 
 
 widow . i hope so . look , here come a pilgrim . i know she will lie 
 at my hous : thither they send one anoth . i 'll question her . 
 god save you , pilgrim ! whither are bound ? 
 helena . to saint jaqu le grand . 
 where do the palmer lodg , i do beseech you ? 
 widow . at the saint franci here , besid the port . 
 helena . is thi the way ? 
 [ a march afar ] 
 widow . ay , marri , is't . hark you ! they come thi way . 
 if you will tarri , holi pilgrim , 
 but till the troop come by , 
 i will conduct you where you shall be lodg 'd ; 
 the rather for i think i know your hostess 
 as ampl as myself . 
 helena . is it yourself ? 
 widow . if you shall pleas so , pilgrim . 
 helena . i thank you , and will stay upon your leisur . 
 widow . you came , i think , from franc ? 
 helena . i did so . 
 widow . here you shall see a countryman of your 
 that ha done worthi servic . 
 helena . hi name , i pray you . 
 diana . the count rousillon . know you such a one ? 
 helena . but by the ear , that hear most nobli of him ; 
 hi face i know not . 
 diana . what some' he is , 
 he 's brave taken here . he stole from franc , 
 as 't is report , for the king had marri him 
 against hi like . think you it is so ? 
 helena . ay , sure , mere the truth ; i know hi ladi . 
 diana . there is a gentleman that serv the count 
 report but coars of her . 
 helena . what 's hi name ? 
 diana . monsieur parol . 
 helena . o , i believ with him , 
 in argument of prais , or to the worth 
 of the great count himself , she is too mean 
 to have her name repeat ; all her deserv 
 is a reserv honesti , and that 
 i have not heard examin 'd . 
 diana . ala , poor ladi ! 
 't is a hard bondag to becom the wife 
 of a detest lord . 
 widow . i sweet , good creatur , wheresoe' she is 
 her heart weigh sadli . thi young maid might do her 
 a shrewd turn , if she plea 'd . 
 helena . how do you mean ? 
 may be the amor count solicit her 
 in the unlaw purpos . 
 widow . he doe , inde ; 
 and broke with all that can in such a suit 
 corrupt the tender honour of a maid ; 
 but she is arm 'd for him , and keep her guard 
 in honestest defenc . 
 
 enter , with drum and colour , bertram , parol , and the 
 whole armi 
 
 mariana . the god forbid els ! 
 widow . so , now they come . 
 that is antonio , the duke 's eldest son ; 
 that , escalu . 
 helena . which is the frenchman ? 
 diana . he- 
 that with the plume ; 't is a most gallant fellow . 
 i would he lov 'd hi wife ; if he were honest 
 he were much goodlier . is't not a handsom gentleman ? 
 helena . i like him well . 
 diana . 't is piti he is not honest . yond 's that same knave 
 that lead him to these place ; were i hi ladi 
 i would poison that vile rascal . 
 helena . which is he ? 
 diana . that jack-an-ap with scarf . whi is he melancholi ? 
 helena . perchanc he 's hurt i ' th ' battl . 
 parol . lose our drum ! well . 
 mariana . he 's shrewdli vex 'd at someth . 
 look , he ha spi us . 
 widow . marri , hang you ! 
 mariana . and your courtesi , for a ring-carri ! 
 exeunt bertram , parol , and armi 
 widow . the troop is past . come , pilgrim , i will bring you 
 where you shall host . of enjoin 'd penit 
 there 's four or five , to great saint jaqu bound , 
 alreadi at my hous . 
 helena . i humbl thank you . 
 pleas it thi matron and thi gentl maid 
 to eat with us to-night ; the charg and thank 
 shall be for me , and , to requit you further , 
 i will bestow some precept of thi virgin , 
 worthi the note . 
 both . we 'll take your offer kindli . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 camp befor florenc 
 
 enter bertram , and the two french lord 
 
 second lord . nay , good my lord , put him to't ; let him have hi way . 
 first lord . if your lordship find him not a hide , hold me no more 
 in your respect . 
 second lord . on my life , my lord , a bubbl . 
 bertram . do you think i am so far deceiv in him ? 
 second lord . believ it , my lord , in mine own direct knowledg , 
 without ani malic , but to speak of him as my kinsman , he 's a 
 most notabl coward , an infinit and endless liar , an hourli 
 promise-break , the owner of no one good qualiti worthi your 
 lordship 's entertain . 
 first lord . it were fit you knew him ; lest , repos too far in hi 
 virtu , which he hath not , he might at some great and trusti 
 busi in a main danger fail you . 
 bertram . i would i knew in what particular action to tri him . 
 first lord . none better than to let him fetch off hi drum , which 
 you hear him so confid undertak to do . 
 second lord . i with a troop of florentin will suddenli surpris 
 him ; such i will have whom i am sure he know not from the enemi . 
 we will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppos no other 
 but that he is carri into the leaguer of the adversari when 
 we bring him to our own tent . be but your lordship present at 
 hi examin ; if he do not , for the promis of hi life and in 
 the highest compuls of base fear , offer to betray you and 
 deliv all the intellig in hi power against you , and that 
 with the divin forfeit of hi soul upon oath , never trust my 
 judgment in anyth . 
 first lord . o , for the love of laughter , let him fetch hi drum ; he 
 say he ha a stratagem for't . when your lordship see the bottom 
 of hi success i n't , and to what metal thi counterfeit lump of 
 ore will be melt , if you give him not john drum 's 
 entertain , your inclin can not be remov . here he come . 
 
 enter parol 
 
 second lord . o , for the love of laughter , hinder not the honour of 
 hi design ; let him fetch off hi drum in ani hand . 
 bertram . how now , monsieur ! thi drum stick sore in your 
 disposit . 
 first lord . a pox on 't ; let it go ; 't is but a drum . 
 parol . but a drum ! is't but a drum ? a drum so lost ! there wa 
 excel command : to charg in with our hors upon our own 
 wing , and to rend our own soldier ! 
 first lord . that wa not to be blam 'd in the command of the 
 servic ; it wa a disast of war that caesar himself could not 
 have prevent , if he had been there to command . 
 bertram . well , we can not greatli condemn our success . 
 some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum ; but it is not to 
 be recov . 
 parol . it might have been recov . 
 bertram . it might , but it is not now . 
 parol . it is to be recov . but that the merit of servic is 
 seldom attribut to the true and exact perform , i would have 
 that drum or anoth , or 'hic jacet . ' 
 bertram . whi , if you have a stomach , to't , monsieur . if you think 
 your mysteri in stratagem can bring thi instrument of honour 
 again into hi nativ quarter , be magnanim in the enterpris , 
 and go on ; i will grace the attempt for a worthi exploit . if you 
 speed well in it , the duke shall both speak of it and extend to 
 you what further becom hi great , even to the utmost 
 syllabl of our worthi . 
 parol . by the hand of a soldier , i will undertak it . 
 bertram . but you must not now slumber in it . 
 parol . i 'll about it thi even ; and i will present pen 
 down my dilemma , encourag myself in my certainti , put myself 
 into my mortal prepar ; and by midnight look to hear further 
 from me . 
 bertram . may i be bold to acquaint hi grace you are gone about it ? 
 parol . i know not what the success will be , my lord , but the 
 attempt i vow . 
 bertram . i know th ' art valiant ; and , to the of thi soldiership , 
 will subscrib for thee . farewel . 
 parol . i love not mani word . exit 
 second lord . no more than a fish love water . is not thi a strang 
 fellow , my lord , that so confid seem to undertak thi 
 busi , which he know is not to be done ; damn himself to do , 
 and dare better be damn 'd than to do 't . 
 first lord . you do not know him , my lord , as we do . certain it is 
 that he will steal himself into a man 's favour , and for a week 
 escap a great deal of discoveri ; but when you find him out , 
 you have him ever after . 
 bertram . whi , do you think he will make no deed at all of thi that 
 so serious he doe address himself unto ? 
 second lord . none in the world ; but return with an invent , and 
 clap upon you two or three probabl lie . but we have almost 
 emboss 'd him . you shall see hi fall to-night ; for inde he is 
 not for your lordship 's respect . 
 first lord . we 'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him . 
 he wa first smok 'd by the old lord lafeu . when hi disguis and 
 he is part , tell me what a sprat you shall find him ; which you 
 shall see thi veri night . 
 second lord . i must go look my twig ; he shall be caught . 
 bertram . your brother , he shall go along with me . 
 second lord . as't pleas your lordship . i 'll leav you . exit 
 bertram . now will i lead you to the hous , and show you 
 the lass i spoke of . 
 first lord . but you say she 's honest . 
 bertram . that 's all the fault . i spoke with her but onc , 
 and found her wondrou cold ; but i sent to her , 
 by thi same coxcomb that we have i ' th ' wind , 
 token and letter which she did re-send ; 
 and thi is all i have done . she 's a fair creatur ; 
 will you go see her ? 
 first lord . with all my heart , my lord . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 florenc . the widow 's hous 
 
 enter helena and widow 
 
 helena . if you misdoubt me that i am not she , 
 i know not how i shall assur you further 
 but i shall lose the ground i work upon . 
 widow . though my estat be fall'n , i wa well born , 
 noth acquaint with these busi ; 
 and would not put my reput now 
 in ani stain act . 
 helena . nor would i wish you . 
 first give me trust the count he is my husband , 
 and what to your sworn counsel i have spoken 
 is so from word to word ; and then you can not , 
 by the good aid that i of you shall borrow , 
 err in bestow it . 
 widow . i should believ you ; 
 for you have show 'd me that which well approv 
 y'are great in fortun . 
 helena . take thi purs of gold , 
 and let me buy your friendli help thu far , 
 which i will over-pay and pay again 
 when i have found it . the count he woo your daughter 
 lay down hi wanton sieg befor her beauti , 
 resolv 'd to carri her . let her in fine consent , 
 as we 'll direct her how 't is best to bear it . 
 now hi import blood will nought deni 
 that she 'll demand . a ring the counti wear 
 that downward hath succeed in hi hous 
 from son to son some four or five descent 
 sinc the first father wore it . thi ring he hold 
 in most rich choic ; yet , in hi idl fire , 
 to buy hi will , it would not seem too dear , 
 howe' repent after . 
 widow . now i see 
 the bottom of your purpos . 
 helena . you see it law then . it is no more 
 but that your daughter , ere she seem as won , 
 desir thi ring ; appoint him an encount ; 
 in fine , deliv me to fill the time , 
 herself most chast absent . after thi , 
 to marri her , i 'll add three thousand crown 
 to what is pass 'd alreadi . 
 widow . i have yield . 
 instruct my daughter how she shall persev , 
 that time and place with thi deceit so law 
 may prove coher . everi night he come 
 with music of all sort , and song compo 'd 
 to her unworthi . it noth stead us 
 to chide him from our eav , for he persist 
 as if hi life lay on 't . 
 helena . whi then to-night 
 let us assay our plot ; which , if it speed , 
 is wick mean in a law deed , 
 and law mean in a law act ; 
 where both not sin , and yet a sin fact . 
 but let 's about it . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 without the florentin camp 
 
 enter second french lord with five or six other soldier in ambush 
 
 second lord . he can come no other way but by thi hedge-corn . 
 when you salli upon him , speak what terribl languag you will ; 
 though you understand it not yourselv , no matter ; for we must 
 not seem to understand him , unless some one among us , whom we 
 must produc for an interpret . 
 first soldier . good captain , let me be th ' interpret . 
 second lord . art not acquaint with him ? know he not thi voic ? 
 first soldier . no , sir , i warrant you . 
 second lord . but what linsey-woolsey ha thou to speak to us again ? 
 first soldier . e'en such as you speak to me . 
 second lord . he must think us some band of stranger i ' th ' 
 adversari 's entertain . now he hath a smack of all 
 neighbour languag , therefor we must everi one be a man of 
 hi own fanci ; not to know what we speak one to anoth , so we 
 seem to know , is to know straight our purpos : chough ' languag , 
 gabbl enough , and good enough . as for you , interpret , you must 
 seem veri polit . but couch , ho ! here he come ; to beguil two 
 hour in a sleep , and then to return and swear the lie he forg . 
 
 enter parol 
 
 parol . ten o'clock . within these three hour 'twill be time 
 enough to go home . what shall i say i have done ? it must be a 
 veri plausiv invent that carri it . they begin to smoke me ; 
 and disgrac have of late knock 'd to often at my door . i find my 
 tongu is too foolhardi ; but my heart hath the fear of mar 
 befor it , and of hi creatur , not dare the report of my 
 tongu . 
 second lord . thi is the first truth that e'er thine own tongu wa 
 guilti of . 
 parol . what the devil should move me to undertak the recoveri 
 of thi drum , be not ignor of the imposs , and 
 know i had no such purpos ? i must give myself some hurt , and 
 say i got them in exploit . yet slight one will not carri it . 
 they will say 'came you off with so littl ? ' and great one i 
 dare not give . wherefor , what 's the instanc ? tongu , i must put 
 you into a butterwoman 's mouth , and buy myself anoth of 
 bajazet 's mule , if you prattl me into these peril . 
 second lord . is it possibl he should know what he is , and be that 
 he is ? 
 parol . i would the cut of my garment would serv the turn , 
 or the break of my spanish sword . 
 second lord . we can not afford you so . 
 parol . or the bare of my beard ; and to say it wa in 
 stratagem . 
 second lord . 'twould not do . 
 parol . or to drown my cloth , and say i wa stripp 'd . 
 second lord . hardli serv . 
 parol . though i swore i leap 'd from the window of the citadel- 
 second lord . how deep ? 
 parol . thirti fathom . 
 second lord . three great oath would scarc make that be believ . 
 parol . i would i had ani drum of the enemi 's ; i would swear i 
 recov 'd it . 
 second lord . you shall hear one anon . [ alarum within ] 
 parol . a drum now of the enemi 's ! 
 second lord . throca movousu , cargo , cargo , cargo . 
 all . cargo , cargo , cargo , villianda par corbo , cargo . 
 parol . o , ransom , ransom ! do not hide mine eye . 
 [ they blindfold him ] 
 first soldier . bosko thromuldo bosko . 
 parol . i know you are the musko ' regiment , 
 and i shall lose my life for want of languag . 
 if there be here german , or dane , low dutch , 
 italian , or french , let him speak to me ; 
 i 'll discov that which shall undo the florentin . 
 first soldier . bosko vauvado . i understand thee , and can speak thi 
 tongu . kerely-bonto , sir , betak thee to thi faith , for 
 seventeen poniard are at thi bosom . 
 parol . o ! 
 first soldier . o , pray , pray , pray ! manka revania dulch . 
 second lord . oscorbidulcho volivorco . 
 first soldier . the gener is content to spare thee yet ; 
 and , hoodwink 'd as thou art , will lead thee on 
 to gather from thee . hapli thou mayst inform 
 someth to save thi life . 
 parol . o , let me live , 
 and all the secret of our camp i 'll show , 
 their forc , their purpos . nay , i 'll speak that 
 which you will wonder at . 
 first soldier . but wilt thou faith ? 
 parol . if i do not , damn me . 
 first soldier . acordo linta . 
 come on ; thou art grant space . 
 exit , parol guard . a short alarum within 
 second lord . go , tell the count rousillon and my brother 
 we have caught the woodcock , and will keep him muffl 
 till we do hear from them . 
 second soldier . captain , i will . 
 second lord . ' a will betray us all unto ourselves- 
 inform on that . 
 second soldier . so i will , sir . 
 second lord . till then i 'll keep him dark and safe lock 'd . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 florenc . the widow 's hous 
 
 enter bertram and diana 
 
 bertram . they told me that your name wa fontibel . 
 diana . no , my good lord , diana . 
 bertram . titl goddess ; 
 and worth it , with addit ! but , fair soul , 
 in your fine frame hath love no qualiti ? 
 if the quick fire of youth light not your mind , 
 you are no maiden , but a monument ; 
 when you are dead , you should be such a one 
 as you are now , for you are cold and stern ; 
 and now you should be as your mother wa 
 when your sweet self wa got . 
 diana . she then wa honest . 
 bertram . so should you be . 
 diana . no . 
 my mother did but duti ; such , my lord , 
 as you owe to your wife . 
 bertram . no more o'that ! 
 i prithe do not strive against my vow . 
 i wa compel 'd to her ; but i love the 
 by love 's own sweet constraint , and will for ever 
 do thee all right of servic . 
 diana . ay , so you serv us 
 till we serv you ; but when you have our rose 
 you bare leav our thorn to prick ourselv , 
 and mock us with our bare . 
 bertram . how have i sworn ! 
 diana . 't is not the mani oath that make the truth , 
 but the plain singl vow that is vow 'd true . 
 what is not holi , that we swear not by , 
 but take the high'st to wit . then , pray you , tell me : 
 if i should swear by jove 's great attribut 
 i lov 'd you dearli , would you believ my oath 
 when i did love you ill ? thi ha no hold , 
 to swear by him whom i protest to love 
 that i will work against him . therefor your oath 
 are word and poor condit , but unseal'd- 
 at least in my opinion . 
 bertram . chang it , chang it ; 
 be not so holy-cruel . love is holi ; 
 and my integr ne'er knew the craft 
 that you do charg men with . stand no more off , 
 but give thyself unto my sick desir , 
 who then recov . say thou art mine , and ever 
 my love as it begin shall so persev . 
 diana . i see that men make rope in such a scarr 
 that we 'll forsak ourselv . give me that ring . 
 bertram . i 'll lend it thee , my dear , but have no power 
 to give it from me . 
 diana . will you not , my lord ? 
 bertram . it is an honour 'long to our hous , 
 bequeath down from mani ancestor ; 
 which were the greatest obloquy i ' th ' world 
 in me to lose . 
 diana . mine honour 's such a ring : 
 my chastiti 's the jewel of our hous , 
 bequeath down from mani ancestor ; 
 which were the greatest obloquy i ' th ' world 
 in me to lose . thu your own proper wisdom 
 bring in the champion honour on my part 
 against your vain assault . 
 bertram . here , take my ring ; 
 my hous , mine honour , yea , my life , be thine , 
 and i 'll be bid by thee . 
 diana . when midnight come , knock at my chamber window ; 
 i 'll order take my mother shall not hear . 
 now will i charg you in the band of truth , 
 when you have conquer 'd my yet maiden bed , 
 remain there but an hour , nor speak to me : 
 my reason are most strong ; and you shall know them 
 when back again thi ring shall be deliv 'd . 
 and on your finger in the night i 'll put 
 anoth ring , that what in time proce 
 may token to the futur our past deed . 
 adieu till then ; then fail not . you have won 
 a wife of me , though there my hope be done . 
 bertram . a heaven on earth i have won by woo thee . 
 exit 
 diana . for which live long to thank both heaven and me ! 
 you may so in the end . 
 my mother told me just how he would woo , 
 as if she sat in 's heart ; she say all men 
 have the like oath . he had sworn to marri me 
 when hi wife 's dead ; therefor i 'll lie with him 
 when i am buri . sinc frenchmen are so braid , 
 marri that will , i live and die a maid . 
 onli , in thi disguis , i think't no sin 
 to cozen him that would unjustli win . exit 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 the florentin camp 
 
 enter the two french lord , and two or three soldier 
 
 second lord . you have not given him hi mother 's letter ? 
 first lord . i have deliv'r it an hour sinc . there is someth 
 i n't that sting hi natur ; for on the read it he chang 'd 
 almost into anoth man . 
 second lord . he ha much worthi blame laid upon him for shake off 
 so good a wife and so sweet a ladi . 
 first lord . especi he hath incur the everlast displeasur 
 of the king , who had even tun 'd hi bounti to sing happi to 
 him . i will tell you a thing , but you shall let it dwell darkli 
 with you . 
 second lord . when you have spoken it , 't is dead , and i am the grave 
 of it . 
 first lord . he hath pervert a young gentlewoman here in florenc , 
 of a most chast renown ; and thi night he flesh hi will in 
 the spoil of her honour . he hath given her hi monument ring , 
 and think himself made in the unchast composit . 
 second lord . now , god delay our rebellion ! as we are ourselv , 
 what thing are we ! 
 first lord . mere our own traitor . and as in the common cours of 
 all treason we still see them reveal themselv till they attain 
 to their abhorr 'd end ; so he that in thi action contriv 
 against hi own nobil , in hi proper stream , o'erflow 
 himself . 
 second lord . is it not meant damnabl in us to be trumpet of our 
 unlaw intent ? we shall not then have hi compani to-night ? 
 first lord . not till after midnight ; for he is diet to hi hour . 
 second lord . that approach apac . i would gladli have him see hi 
 compani anatomiz 'd , that he might take a measur of hi own 
 judgment , wherein so curious he had set thi counterfeit . 
 first lord . we will not meddl with him till he come ; for hi 
 presenc must be the whip of the other . 
 second lord . in the meantim , what hear you of these war ? 
 first lord . i hear there is an overtur of peac . 
 second lord . nay , i assur you , a peac conclud . 
 first lord . what will count rousillon do then ? will he travel 
 higher , or return again into franc ? 
 second lord . i perceiv , by thi demand , you are not altogeth 
 of hi counsel . 
 first lord . let it be forbid , sir ! so should i be a great deal 
 of hi act . 
 second lord . sir , hi wife , some two month sinc , fled from hi 
 hous . her pretenc is a pilgrimag to saint jaqu le grand ; 
 which holi undertak with most auster sanctimoni she 
 accomplish 'd ; and , there resid , the tender of her natur 
 becam as a prey to her grief ; in fine , made a groan of her last 
 breath , and now she sing in heaven . 
 first lord . how is thi justifi ? 
 second lord . the stronger part of it by her own letter , which 
 make her stori true even to the point of her death . her death 
 itself , which could not be her offic to say is come , wa 
 faith confirm 'd by the rector of the place . 
 first lord . hath the count all thi intellig ? 
 second lord . ay , and the particular confirm , point from 
 point , to the full arm of the veriti . 
 first lord . i am heartili sorri that he 'll be glad of thi . 
 second lord . how mightili sometim we make us comfort of our 
 loss ! 
 first lord . and how mightili some other time we drown our gain in 
 tear ! the great digniti that hi valour hath here acquir 'd for 
 him shall at home be encount'r with a shame as ampl . 
 second lord . the web of our life is of a mingl yarn , good and ill 
 togeth . our virtu would be proud if our fault whipt them 
 not ; and our crime would despair if they were not cherish 'd by 
 our virtu . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 how now ? where 's your master ? 
 servant . he met the duke in the street , sir ; of whom he hath taken 
 a solemn leav . hi lordship will next morn for franc . the 
 duke hath offer him letter of commend to the king . 
 second lord . they shall be no more than need there , if they were 
 more than they can commend . 
 first lord . they can not be too sweet for the king 's tart . 
 here 's hi lordship now . 
 
 enter bertram 
 
 how now , my lord , is't not after midnight ? 
 bertram . i have to-night dispatch 'd sixteen busi , a month 's 
 length apiec ; by an abstract of success : i have congi with the 
 duke , done my adieu with hi nearest ; buri a wife , mourn 'd for 
 her ; writ to my ladi mother i am return ; entertain 'd my 
 convoy ; and between these main parcel of dispatch effect mani 
 nicer need . the last wa the greatest , but that i have not end 
 yet . 
 second lord . if the busi be of ani difficulti and thi morn 
 your departur henc , it requir hast of your lordship . 
 bertram . i mean the busi is not end , as fear to hear of it 
 hereaft . but shall we have thi dialogu between the fool and 
 the soldier ? come , bring forth thi counterfeit modul ha 
 deceiv 'd me like a double-mean prophesi . 
 second lord . bring him forth . [ exeunt soldier ] ha sat i ' th ' 
 stock all night , poor gallant knave . 
 bertram . no matter ; hi heel have deserv 'd it , in usurp hi 
 spur so long . how doe he carri himself ? 
 second lord . i have told your lordship alreadi the stock carri 
 him . but to answer you as you would be understood : he weep like 
 a wench that had shed her milk ; he hath confess 'd himself to 
 morgan , whom he suppos to be a friar , from the time of hi 
 remembr to thi veri instant disast of hi set i ' th ' 
 stock . and what think you he hath confess 'd ? 
 bertram . noth of me , ha ' a ? 
 second lord . hi confess is taken , and it shall be read to hi 
 face ; if your lordship be i n't , as i believ you are , you must 
 have the patienc to hear it . 
 
 enter parol guard , and 
 first soldier as interpret 
 
 bertram . a plagu upon him ! muffl ! he can say noth of me . 
 second lord . hush , hush ! hoodman come . portotartarossa . 
 first soldier . he call for the tortur . what will you say without 
 'em ? 
 parol . i will confess what i know without constraint ; if ye 
 pinch me like a pasti , i can say no more . 
 first soldier . bosko chimurcho . 
 second lord . boblibindo chicurmurco . 
 first soldier . you are a merci gener . our gener bid you 
 answer to what i shall ask you out of a note . 
 parol . and truli , as i hope to live . 
 first soldier . 'first demand of him how mani hors the duke is 
 strong . ' what say you to that ? 
 parol . five or six thousand ; but veri weak and unservic . 
 the troop are all scatter , and the command veri poor 
 rogu , upon my reput and credit , and as i hope to live . 
 first soldier . shall i set down your answer so ? 
 parol . do ; i 'll take the sacrament on 't , how and which way you 
 will . 
 bertram . all 's one to him . what a past-sav slave is thi ! 
 second lord . y'are deceiv 'd , my lord ; thi is monsieur parol , 
 the gallant militarist-that wa hi own phrase-that had the whole 
 theoric of war in the knot of hi scarf , and the practic in the 
 chape of hi dagger . 
 first lord . i will never trust a man again for keep hi sword 
 clean ; nor believ he can have everyth in him by wear hi 
 apparel neatli . 
 first soldier . well , that 's set down . 
 parol . 'five or six thousand hors ' i said-i will say true- 'or 
 thereabout ' set down , for i 'll speak truth . 
 second lord . he 's veri near the truth in thi . 
 bertram . but i con him no thank for't in the natur he deliv it . 
 parol . 'poor rogu ' i pray you say . 
 first soldier . well , that 's set down . 
 parol . i humbl thank you , sir . a truth 's a truth-th rogu are 
 marvel poor . 
 first soldier . 'demand of him of what strength they are a-foot . ' 
 what say you to that ? 
 parol . by my troth , sir , if i were to live thi present hour , i 
 will tell true . let me see : spurio , a hundr and fifti ; 
 sebastian , so mani ; corambu , so mani ; jaqu , so mani ; guiltian , 
 cosmo , lodowick , and gratii , two hundr fifti each ; mine own 
 compani , chitoph , vaumond , bentii , two hundr fifti each ; so 
 that the muster-fil , rotten and sound , upon my life , amount not 
 to fifteen thousand poll ; half of the which dare not shake the 
 snow from off their cassock lest they shake themselv to 
 piec . 
 bertram . what shall be done to him ? 
 second lord . noth , but let him have thank . demand of him my 
 condit , and what credit i have with the duke . 
 first soldier . well , that 's set down . 'you shall demand of him 
 whether one captain dumain be i ' th ' camp , a frenchman ; what hi 
 reput is with the duke , what hi valour , honesti , expert 
 in war ; or whether he think it were not possibl , with 
 well-weigh sum of gold , to corrupt him to a revolt . ' what say 
 you to thi ? what do you know of it ? 
 parol . i beseech you , let me answer to the particular of the 
 inter'gatori . demand them singli . 
 first soldier . do you know thi captain dumain ? 
 parol . i know him : ' a wa a botcher 's prentic in pari , from 
 whenc he wa whipt for get the shriev 's fool with child-a 
 dumb innoc that could not say him nay . 
 bertram . nay , by your leav , hold your hand ; though i know hi 
 brain are forfeit to the next tile that fall . 
 first soldier . well , is thi captain in the duke of florenc 's 
 camp ? 
 parol . upon my knowledg , he is , and lousi . 
 second lord . nay , look not so upon me ; we shall hear of your 
 lordship anon . 
 first soldier . what is hi reput with the duke ? 
 parol . the duke know him for no other but a poor offic of 
 mine ; and writ to me thi other day to turn him out o ' th ' band . 
 i think i have hi letter in my pocket . 
 first soldier . marri , we 'll search . 
 parol . in good sad , i do not know ; either it is there or it 
 is upon a file with the duke 's other letter in my tent . 
 first soldier . here 't is ; here 's a paper . shall i read it to you ? 
 parol . i do not know if it be it or no . 
 bertram . our interpret doe it well . 
 second lord . excel . 
 first soldier . [ read ] 'dian , the count 's a fool , and full of 
 gold . ' 
 parol . that is not the duke 's letter , sir ; that is an 
 advertis to a proper maid in florenc , one diana , to take 
 heed of the allur of one count rousillon , a foolish idl 
 boy , but for all that veri ruttish . i pray you , sir , put it up 
 again . 
 first soldier . nay , i 'll read it first by your favour . 
 parol . my mean i n't , i protest , wa veri honest in the behalf 
 of the maid ; for i knew the young count to be a danger and 
 lascivi boy , who is a whale to virgin , and devour up all 
 the fri it find . 
 bertram . damnabl both-sid rogu ! 
 first soldier . [ read ] 
 'when he swear oath , bid him drop gold , and take it ; 
 after he score , he never pay the score . 
 half won is match well made ; match , and well make it ; 
 he ne'er pay after-debt , take it befor . 
 and say a soldier , dian , told thee thi : 
 men are to mell with , boy are not to kiss ; 
 for count of thi , the count 's a fool , i know it , 
 who pay befor , but not when he doe owe it . 
 thine , as he vow 'd to thee in thine ear , 
 parol . ' 
 bertram . he shall be whipt through the armi with thi rhyme in 's 
 forehead . 
 first lord . thi is your devot friend , sir , the manifold 
 linguist , and the amnipot soldier . 
 bertram . i could endur anyth befor but a cat , and now he 's a 
 cat to me . 
 first soldier . i perceiv , sir , by our gener 's look we shall be 
 fain to hang you . 
 parol . my life , sir , in ani case ! not that i am afraid to die , 
 but that , my offenc be mani , i would repent out the 
 remaind of natur . let me live , sir , in a dungeon , i ' th ' 
 stock , or anywher , so i may live . 
 first soldier . we 'll see what may be done , so you confess freeli ; 
 therefor , onc more to thi captain dumain : you have answer 'd to 
 hi reput with the duke , and to hi valour ; what is hi 
 honesti ? 
 parol . he will steal , sir , an egg out of a cloister ; for rape 
 and ravish he parallel nessu . he profess not keep of 
 oath ; in break 'em he is stronger than hercul . he will lie , 
 sir , with such volubl that you would think truth were a fool . 
 drunken is hi best virtu , for he will be swine-drunk ; and 
 in hi sleep he doe littl harm , save to hi bedcloth about 
 him ; but they know hi condit and lay him in straw . i have 
 but littl more to say , sir , of hi honesti . he ha everyth 
 that an honest man should not have ; what an honest man should 
 have he ha noth . 
 second lord . i begin to love him for thi . 
 bertram . for thi descript of thine honesti ? a pox upon him ! for 
 me , he 's more and more a cat . 
 first soldier . what say you to hi expert in war ? 
 parol . faith , sir , ha led the drum befor the english 
 tragedians-to beli him i will not-and more of hi soldier-ship 
 i know not , except in that countri he had the honour to be the 
 offic at a place there call mile-end to instruct for the 
 doubl of files-i would do the man what honour i can-but of 
 thi i am not certain . 
 second lord . he hath out-villain 'd villaini so far that the rariti 
 redeem him . 
 bertram . a pox on him ! he 's a cat still . 
 first soldier . hi qualiti be at thi poor price , i need not 
 to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt . 
 parol . sir , for a cardecu he will sell the fee-simpl of hi 
 salvat , the inherit of it ; and cut th ' entail from all 
 remaind and a perpetu success for it perpetu . 
 first soldier . what 's hi brother , the other captain dumain ? 
 first lord . whi doe he ask him of me ? 
 first soldier . what 's he ? 
 parol . e'en a crow o ' th ' same nest ; not altogeth so great as 
 the first in good , but greater a great deal in evil . he 
 excel hi brother for a coward ; yet hi brother is reput one 
 of the best that is . in a retreat he outrun ani lackey : marri , 
 in come on he ha the cramp . 
 first soldier . if your life be save , will you undertak to betray 
 the florentin ? 
 parol . ay , and the captain of hi hors , count rousillon . 
 first soldier . i 'll whisper with the gener , and know hi 
 pleasur . 
 parol . [ asid ] i 'll no more drum . a plagu of all drum ! 
 onli to seem to deserv well , and to beguil the supposit of 
 that lascivi young boy the count , have i run into thi danger . 
 yet who would have suspect an ambush where i wa taken ? 
 first soldier . there is no remedi , sir , but you must die . 
 the gener say you that have so traitor discov 'd the 
 secret of your armi , and made such pestifer report of men 
 veri nobli held , can serv the world for no honest use ; therefor 
 you must die . come , headsman , of with hi head . 
 parol . o lord , sir , let me live , or let me see my death ! 
 first soldier . that shall you , and take your leav of all your 
 friend . [ unmuffl him ] so look about you ; know you ani here ? 
 bertram . good morrow , nobl captain . 
 first lord . god bless you , captain parol . 
 second lord . god save you , nobl captain . 
 first lord . captain , what greet will you to my lord lafeu ? i am 
 for franc . 
 second lord . good captain , will you give me a copi of the sonnet 
 you writ to diana in behalf of the count rousillon ? an i were not 
 a veri coward i 'd compel it of you ; but fare you well . 
 exeunt bertram and lord 
 first soldier . you are undon , captain , all but your scarf ; that 
 ha a knot on 't yet . 
 parol . who can not be crush 'd with a plot ? 
 first soldier . if you could find out a countri where but women were 
 that had receiv so much shame , you might begin an impud 
 nation . fare ye well , sir ; i am for franc too ; we shall speak of 
 you there . exit with soldier 
 parol . yet am i thank . if my heart were great , 
 'twould burst at thi . captain i 'll be no more ; 
 but i will eat , and drink , and sleep as soft 
 as captain shall . simpli the thing i am 
 shall make me live . who know himself a braggart , 
 let him fear thi ; for it will come to pass 
 that everi braggart shall be found an ass . 
 rust , sword ; cool , blush ; and , parol , live 
 safest in shame . be fool 'd , by fool'ri thrive . 
 there 's place and mean for everi man aliv . 
 i 'll after them . exit 
 
 
 
 
 act iv scene < num > . 
 the widow 's hous 
 
 enter helena , widow , and diana 
 
 helena . that you may well perceiv i have not wrong 'd you ! 
 one of the greatest in the christian world 
 shall be my sureti ; fore whose throne 't is need , 
 ere i can perfect mine intent , to kneel . 
 time wa i did him a desir offic , 
 dear almost as hi life ; which gratitud 
 through flinti tartar 's bosom would peep forth , 
 and answer 'thank . ' i duli am inform 'd 
 hi grace is at marseil , to which place 
 we have conveni convoy . you must know 
 i am suppos dead . the armi break , 
 my husband hie him home ; where , heaven aid , 
 and by the leav of my good lord the king , 
 we 'll be befor our welcom . 
 widow . gentl madam , 
 you never had a servant to whose trust 
 your busi wa more welcom . 
 helena . nor you , mistress , 
 ever a friend whose thought more truli labour 
 to recompens your love . doubt not but heaven 
 hath brought me up to be your daughter 's dower , 
 as it hath fate her to be my motiv 
 and helper to a husband . but , o strang men ! 
 that can such sweet use make of what they hate , 
 when sauci trust of the cozen 'd thought 
 defil the pitchi night . so lust doth play 
 with what it loath , for that which is away . 
 but more of thi hereaft . you , diana , 
 under my poor instruct yet must suffer 
 someth in my behalf . 
 diana . let death and honesti 
 go with your imposit , i am your 
 upon your will to suffer . 
 helena . yet , i pray you : 
 but with the word the time will bring on summer , 
 when brier shall have leav as well as thorn 
 and be as sweet as sharp . we must away ; 
 our waggon is prepar 'd , and time reviv us . 
 all 's well that end well . still the fine 's the crown . 
 whate' the cours , the end is the renown . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iv scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 enter countess , lafeu , and clown 
 
 lafeu . no , no , no , son wa misl with a snipt-taffeta fellow 
 there , whose villain saffron would have made all the unbak 'd 
 and doughi youth of a nation in hi colour . your daughter-in-law 
 had been aliv at thi hour , and your son here at home , more 
 advanc 'd by the king than by that red-tail 'd humble-be i speak 
 of . 
 countess . i would i had not known him . it wa the death of the most 
 virtuou gentlewoman that ever natur had prais for creat . if 
 she had partaken of my flesh , and cost me the dearest groan of a 
 mother . i could not have owe her a more root love . 
 lafeu . 't wa a good ladi , 't wa a good ladi . we may pick a thousand 
 sallet ere we light on such anoth herb . 
 clown . inde , sir , she wa the sweet-marjoram of the sallet , or , 
 rather , the herb of grace . 
 lafeu . they are not sallet-herb , you knave ; they are nose-herb . 
 clown . i am no great nebuchadnezzar , sir ; i have not much skill in 
 grass . 
 lafeu . whether dost thou profess thyself-a knave or a fool ? 
 clown . a fool , sir , at a woman 's servic , and a knave at a man 's . 
 lafeu . your distinct ? 
 clown . i would cozen the man of hi wife , and do hi servic . 
 lafeu . so you were a knave at hi servic , inde . 
 clown . and i would give hi wife my baubl , sir , to do her servic . 
 lafeu . i will subscrib for thee ; thou art both knave and fool . 
 clown . at your servic . 
 lafeu . no , no , no . 
 clown . whi , sir , if i can not serv you , i can serv as great a 
 princ as you are . 
 lafeu . who 's that ? a frenchman ? 
 clown . faith , sir , ' a ha an english name ; but hi fisnomi is more 
 hotter in franc than there . 
 lafeu . what princ is that ? 
 clown . the black princ , sir ; alia , the princ of dark ; alia , 
 the devil . 
 lafeu . hold thee , there 's my purs . i give thee not thi to suggest 
 thee from thi master thou talk'st of ; serv him still . 
 clown . i am a woodland fellow , sir , that alway love a great fire ; 
 and the master i speak of ever keep a good fire . but , sure , he 
 is the princ of the world ; let hi nobil remain in 's court . i 
 am for the hous with the narrow gate , which i take to be too 
 littl for pomp to enter . some that humbl themselv may ; but 
 the mani will be too chill and tender : and they 'll be for the 
 flow'ri way that lead to the broad gate and the great fire . 
 lafeu . go thi way , i begin to be aweari of thee ; and i tell thee 
 so befor , becaus i would not fall out with thee . go thi way ; 
 let my hors be well look 'd to , without ani trick . 
 clown . if i put ani trick upon 'em , sir , they shall be jade ' 
 trick , which are their own right by the law of natur . 
 exit 
 lafeu . a shrewd knave , and an unhappi . 
 countess . so ' a is . my lord that 's gone made himself much sport 
 out of him . by hi author he remain here , which he think is 
 a patent for hi sauci ; and inde he ha no pace , but run 
 where he will . 
 lafeu . i like him well ; 't is not amiss . and i wa about to tell 
 you , sinc i heard of the good ladi 's death , and that my lord 
 your son wa upon hi return home , i move the king my master to 
 speak in the behalf of my daughter ; which , in the minor of 
 them both , hi majesti out of a self-graci remembr did 
 first propos . hi high hath promi 'd me to do it ; and , to 
 stop up the displeasur he hath conceiv against your son , there 
 is no fitter matter . how doe your ladyship like it ? 
 countess . with veri much content , my lord ; and i wish it happili 
 effect . 
 lafeu . hi high come post from marseil , of as abl bodi as 
 when he number 'd thirti ; ' a will be here to-morrow , or i am 
 deceiv 'd by him that in such intellig hath seldom fail 'd . 
 countess . it rejoic me that i hope i shall see him ere i die . 
 i have letter that my son will be here to-night . i shall beseech 
 your lordship to remain with me tal they meet togeth . 
 lafeu . madam , i wa think with what manner i might safe be 
 admit . 
 countess . you need but plead your honour privileg . 
 lafeu . ladi , of that i have made a bold charter ; but , i thank my 
 god , it hold yet . 
 
 re-ent clown 
 
 clown . o madam , yonder 's my lord your son with a patch of velvet 
 on 's face ; whether there be a scar under 't or no , the velvet 
 know ; but 't is a goodli patch of velvet . hi left cheek is a 
 cheek of two pile and a half , but hi right cheek is worn bare . 
 lafeu . a scar nobli got , or a nobl scar , is a good liv'ri of 
 honour ; so belik is that . 
 clown . but it is your carbonado 'd face . 
 lafeu . let us go see your son , i pray you ; 
 i long to talk with the young nobl soldier . 
 clown . faith , there 's a dozen of 'em , with delic fine hat , and 
 most courteou feather , which bow the head and nod at everi man . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 marseil . a street 
 
 enter helena , widow , and diana , with two attend 
 
 helena . but thi exceed post day and night 
 must wear your spirit low ; we can not help it . 
 but sinc you have made the day and night as one , 
 to wear your gentl limb in my affair , 
 be bold you do so grow in my requit 
 as noth can unroot you . 
 
 enter a gentleman 
 
 in happi time ! 
 thi man may help me to hi majesti 's ear , 
 if he would spend hi power . god save you , sir . 
 gentleman . and you . 
 helena . sir , i have seen you in the court of franc . 
 gentleman . i have been sometim there . 
 helena . i do presum , sir , that you are not fall'n 
 from the report that goe upon your good ; 
 and therefor , goad with most sharp occas , 
 which lay nice manner by , i put you to 
 the use of your own virtu , for the which 
 i shall continu thank . 
 gentleman . what 's your will ? 
 helena . that it will pleas you 
 to give thi poor petit to the king ; 
 and aid me with that store of power you have 
 to come into hi presenc . 
 gentleman . the king 's not here . 
 helena . not here , sir ? 
 gentleman . not inde . 
 he henc remov 'd last night , and with more hast 
 than is hi use . 
 widow . lord , how we lose our pain ! 
 helena . all 's well that end well yet , 
 though time seem so advers and mean unfit . 
 i do beseech you , whither is he gone ? 
 gentleman . marri , as i take it , to rousillon ; 
 whither i am go . 
 helena . i do beseech you , sir , 
 sinc you are like to see the king befor me , 
 commend the paper to hi graciou hand ; 
 which i presum shall render you no blame , 
 but rather make you thank your pain for it . 
 i will come after you with what good speed 
 our mean will make us mean . 
 gentleman . thi i 'll do for you . 
 helena . and you shall find yourself to be well thank 'd , 
 whate' fall more . we must to hors again ; 
 go , go , provid . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the inner court of the count 's palac 
 
 enter clown and parol 
 
 parol . good monsieur lavach , give my lord lafeu thi letter . i 
 have ere now , sir , been better known to you , when i have held 
 familiar with fresher cloth ; but i am now , sir , muddi in 
 fortun 's mood , and smell somewhat strong of her strong 
 displeasur . 
 clown . truli , fortun 's displeasur is but sluttish , if it smell 
 so strongli as thou speak'st of . i will henceforth eat no fish 
 of fortun 's butt'r . prithe , allow the wind . 
 parol . nay , you need not to stop your nose , sir ; i spake but by 
 a metaphor . 
 clown . inde , sir , if your metaphor stink , i will stop my nose ; or 
 against ani man 's metaphor . prithe , get thee further . 
 parol . pray you , sir , deliv me thi paper . 
 clown . foh ! prithe stand away . a paper from fortun 's close-stool 
 to give to a nobleman ! look here he come himself . 
 
 enter lafeu 
 
 here is a pur of fortun 's , sir , or of fortun 's cat , but not 
 a musk-cat , that ha fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her 
 displeasur , and , as he say , is muddi withal . pray you , sir , 
 use the carp as you may ; for he look like a poor , decay , 
 ingeni , foolish , rascal knave . i do piti hi distress 
 in my simil of comfort , and leav him to your lordship . 
 exit 
 parol . my lord , i am a man whom fortun hath cruelli scratch 'd . 
 lafeu . and what would you have me to do ? 't is too late to pare her 
 nail now . wherein have you play the knave with fortun , that 
 she should scratch you , who of herself is a good ladi and would 
 not have knave thrive long under her ? there 's a cardecu for 
 you . let the justic make you and fortun friend ; i am for 
 other busi . 
 parol . i beseech your honour to hear me one singl word . 
 lafeu . you beg a singl penni more ; come , you shall ha't ; save your 
 word . 
 parol . my name , my good lord , is parol . 
 lafeu . you beg more than word then . cox my passion ! give me your 
 hand . how doe your drum ? 
 parol . o my good lord , you were the first that found me . 
 lafeu . wa i , in sooth ? and i wa the first that lost thee . 
 parol . it lie in you , my lord , to bring me in some grace , for 
 you did bring me out . 
 lafeu . out upon thee , knave ! dost thou put upon me at onc both the 
 offic of god and the devil ? one bring the in grace , and the 
 other bring thee out . [ trumpet sound ] the king 's come ; i 
 know by hi trumpet . sirrah , inquir further after me ; i had 
 talk of you last night . though you are a fool and a knave , you 
 shall eat . go to ; follow . 
 parol . i prais god for you . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v scene < num > . 
 rousillon . the count 's palac 
 
 flourish . enter king , countess , lafeu , the two french lord , with attend 
 
 king . we lost a jewel of her , and our esteem 
 wa made much poorer by it ; but your son , 
 as mad in folli , lack 'd the sens to know 
 her estim home . 
 countess . 't is past , my lieg ; 
 and i beseech your majesti to make it 
 natur rebellion , done i ' th ' blaze of youth , 
 when oil and fire , too strong for reason 's forc , 
 o'erbear it and burn on . 
 king . my honour 'd ladi , 
 i have forgiven and forgotten all ; 
 though my reveng were high bent upon him 
 and watch 'd the time to shoot . 
 lafeu . thi i must say- 
 but first , i beg my pardon : the young lord 
 did to hi majesti , hi mother , and hi ladi , 
 offenc of mighti note ; but to himself 
 the greatest wrong of all . he lost a wife 
 whose beauti did astonish the survey 
 of richest eye ; whose word all ear took captiv ; 
 whose dear perfect heart that scorn 'd to serv 
 humbl call 'd mistress . 
 king . prais what is lost 
 make the remembr dear . well , call him hither ; 
 we are reconcil 'd , and the first view shall kill 
 all repetit . let him not ask our pardon ; 
 the natur of hi great offenc is dead , 
 and deeper than oblivion do we buri 
 th ' incens relic of it ; let him approach , 
 a stranger , no offend ; and inform him 
 so 't is our will he should . 
 gentleman . i shall , my lieg . exit gentleman 
 king . what say he to your daughter ? have you spoke ? 
 lafeu . all that he is hath refer to your high . 
 king . then shall we have a match . i have letter sent me 
 that set him high in fame . 
 
 enter bertram 
 
 lafeu . he look well on 't . 
 king . i am not a day of season , 
 for thou mayst see a sunshin and a hail 
 in me at onc . but to the brightest beam 
 distract cloud give way ; so stand thou forth ; 
 the time is fair again . 
 bertram . my high-rep blame , 
 dear sovereign , pardon to me . 
 king . all is whole ; 
 not one word more of the consum time . 
 let 's take the instant by the forward top ; 
 for we are old , and on our quick'st decre 
 th ' inaud and noiseless foot of time 
 steal ere we can effect them . you rememb 
 the daughter of thi lord ? 
 bertram . admiringli , my lieg . at first 
 i stuck my choic upon her , ere my heart 
 durst make too bold herald of my tongu ; 
 where the impress of mine eye infix , 
 contempt hi scorn perspect did lend me , 
 which warp 'd the line of everi other favour , 
 scorn 'd a fair colour or express 'd it stol'n , 
 extend or contract all proport 
 to a most hideou object . thenc it came 
 that she whom all men prai 'd , and whom myself , 
 sinc i have lost , have lov 'd , wa in mine eye 
 the dust that did offend it . 
 king . well excu 'd . 
 that thou didst love her , strike some score away 
 from the great compt ; but love that come too late , 
 like a remors pardon slowli carri , 
 to the great sender turn a sour offenc , 
 cri 'that 's good that 's gone . ' our rash fault 
 make trivial price of seriou thing we have , 
 not know them until we know their grave . 
 oft our displeasur , to ourselv unjust , 
 destroy our friend , and after weep their dust ; 
 our own love wake cri to see what 's done , 
 while shame hate sleep out the afternoon . 
 be thi sweet helen 's knell . and now forget her . 
 send forth your amor token for fair maudlin . 
 the main consent are had ; and here we 'll stay 
 to see our widow 's second marriage-day . 
 countess . which better than the first , o dear heaven , bless ! 
 or , ere they meet , in me , o natur , cess ! 
 lafeu . come on , my son , in whom my hous 's name 
 must be digest ; give a favour from you , 
 to sparkl in the spirit of my daughter , 
 that she may quickli come . 
 [ bertram give a ring ] 
 by my old beard , 
 and ev'ri hair that 's on 't , helen , that 's dead , 
 wa a sweet creatur ; such a ring as thi , 
 the last that e'er i took her leav at court , 
 i saw upon her finger . 
 bertram . her it wa not . 
 king . now , pray you , let me see it ; for mine eye , 
 while i wa speak , oft wa fasten 'd to't . 
 thi ring wa mine ; and when i gave it helen 
 i bade her , if her fortun ever stood 
 necess to help , that by thi token 
 i would reliev her . had you that craft to reav her 
 of what should stead her most ? 
 bertram . my graciou sovereign , 
 howe' it pleas you to take it so , 
 the ring wa never her . 
 countess . son , on my life , 
 i have seen her wear it ; and she reckon 'd it 
 at her life 's rate . 
 lafeu . i am sure i saw her wear it . 
 bertram . you are deceiv 'd , my lord ; she never saw it . 
 in florenc wa it from a casement thrown me , 
 wrapp 'd in a paper , which contain 'd the name 
 of her that threw it . nobl she wa , and thought 
 i stood engag 'd ; but when i had subscrib 'd 
 to mine own fortun , and inform 'd her fulli 
 i could not answer in that cours of honour 
 as she had made the overtur , she cea 'd , 
 in heavi satisfact , and would never 
 receiv the ring again . 
 king . plutu himself , 
 that know the tinct and multipli med'cin , 
 hath not in natur 's mysteri more scienc 
 than i have in thi ring . 't wa mine , 't wa helen 's , 
 whoever gave it you . then , if you know 
 that you are well acquaint with yourself , 
 confess 't wa her , and by what rough enforc 
 you got it from her . she call 'd the saint to sureti 
 that she would never put it from her finger 
 unless she gave it to yourself in bed- 
 where you have never come- or sent it us 
 upon her great disast . 
 bertram . she never saw it . 
 king . thou speak'st it fals , as i love mine honour ; 
 and mak'st conjectur fear to come into me 
 which i would fain shut out . if it should prove 
 that thou art so inhuman- 'twill not prove so . 
 and yet i know not- thou didst hate her deadli , 
 and she is dead ; which noth , but to close 
 her eye myself , could win me to believ 
 more than to see thi ring . take him away . 
 [ guard seiz bertram ] 
 my fore-past proof , howe' the matter fall , 
 shall tax my fear of littl vaniti , 
 have vainli fear 'd too littl . away with him . 
 we 'll sift thi matter further . 
 bertram . if you shall prove 
 thi ring wa ever her , you shall as easi 
 prove that i husband her bed in florenc , 
 where she yet never wa . exit , guard 
 king . i am wrapp 'd in dismal think . 
 
 enter a gentleman 
 
 gentleman . graciou sovereign , 
 whether i have been to blame or no , i know not : 
 here 's a petit from a florentin , 
 who hath , for four or five remov , come short 
 to tender it herself . i undertook it , 
 vanquish 'd thereto by the fair grace and speech 
 of the poor suppliant , who by thi , i know , 
 is here attend ; her busi look in her 
 with an import visag ; and she told me 
 in a sweet verbal brief it did concern 
 your high with herself . 
 king . [ read the letter ] 'upon hi mani protest to marri me 
 when hi wife wa dead , i blush to say it , he won me . now is the 
 count rousillon a widow ; hi vow are forfeit to me , and my 
 honour 's paid to him . he stole from florenc , take no leav , 
 and i follow him to hi countri for justic . grant it me , o king ! 
 in you it best lie ; otherwis a seduc flourish , and a poor 
 maid is undon . 
 diana capilet . ' 
 lafeu . i will buy me a son-in-law in a fair , and toll for thi . 
 i 'll none of him . 
 king . the heaven have thought well on thee , lafeu , 
 to bring forth thi discov'ri . seek these suitor . 
 go speedili , and bring again the count . 
 exeunt attend 
 i am afeard the life of helen , ladi , 
 wa foulli snatch 'd . 
 countess . now , justic on the doer ! 
 
 enter bertram , guard 
 
 king . i wonder , sir , sith wive are monster to you . 
 and that you fli them as you swear them lordship , 
 yet you desir to marri . 
 enter widow and diana 
 what woman 's that ? 
 diana . i am , my lord , a wretch florentin , 
 deriv from the ancient capilet . 
 my suit , as i do understand , you know , 
 and therefor know how far i may be piti . 
 widow . i am her mother , sir , whose age and honour 
 both suffer under thi complaint we bring , 
 and both shall ceas , without your remedi . 
 king . come hither , count ; do you know these women ? 
 bertram . my lord , i neither can nor will deni 
 but that i know them . do they charg me further ? 
 diana . whi do you look so strang upon your wife ? 
 bertram . she 's none of mine , my lord . 
 diana . if you shall marri , 
 you give away thi hand , and that is mine ; 
 you give away heaven 's vow , and those are mine ; 
 you give away myself , which is known mine ; 
 for i by vow am so embodi your 
 that she which marri you must marri me , 
 either both or none . 
 lafeu . [ to bertram ] your reput come too short for 
 my daughter ; you are no husband for her . 
 bertram . my lord , thi is a fond and desp'rat creatur 
 whom sometim i have laugh 'd with . let your high 
 lay a more nobl thought upon mine honour 
 than for to think that i would sink it here . 
 king . sir , for my thought , you have them ill to friend 
 till your deed gain them . fairer prove your honour 
 than in my thought it lie ! 
 diana . good my lord , 
 ask him upon hi oath if he doe think 
 he had not my virgin . 
 king . what say'st thou to her ? 
 bertram . she 's impud , my lord , 
 and wa a common gamest to the camp . 
 diana . he doe me wrong , my lord ; if i were so 
 he might have bought me at a common price . 
 do not believ him . o , behold thi ring , 
 whose high respect and rich valid 
 did lack a parallel ; yet , for all that , 
 he gave it to a common o ' th ' camp , 
 if i be one . 
 countess . he blush , and 't is it . 
 of six preced ancestor , that gem 
 conferr 'd by testament to th ' sequent issu , 
 hath it been ow 'd and worn . thi is hi wife : 
 that ring 's a thousand proof . 
 king . methought you said 
 you saw one here in court could wit it . 
 diana . i did , my lord , but loath am to produc 
 so bad an instrument ; hi name 's parol . 
 lafeu . i saw the man to-day , if man he be . 
 king . find him , and bring him hither . exit an attend 
 bertram . what of him ? 
 he 's quot for a most perfidi slave , 
 with all the spot o ' th ' world tax 'd and debauch 'd , 
 whose natur sicken but to speak a truth . 
 am i or that or thi for what he 'll utter 
 that will speak anyth ? 
 king . she hath that ring of your . 
 bertram . i think she ha . certain it is i lik 'd her , 
 and board her i ' th ' wanton way of youth . 
 she knew her distanc , and did angl for me , 
 mad my eager with her restraint , 
 as all impedi in fanci 's cours 
 are motiv of more fanci ; and , in fine , 
 her infinit cun with her modern grace 
 subdu 'd me to her rate . she got the ring ; 
 and i had that which ani inferior might 
 at market-pric have bought . 
 diana . i must be patient . 
 you that have turn 'd off a first so nobl wife 
 may justli diet me . i pray you yet- 
 sinc you lack virtu , i will lose a husband- 
 send for your ring , i will return it home , 
 and give me mine again . 
 bertram . i have it not . 
 king . what ring wa your , i pray you ? 
 diana . sir , much like 
 the same upon your finger . 
 king . know you thi ring ? thi ring wa hi of late . 
 diana . and thi wa it i gave him , be abe . 
 king . the stori , then , goe fals you threw it him 
 out of a casement . 
 diana . i have spoke the truth . 
 
 enter parol 
 
 bertram . my lord , i do confess the ring wa her . 
 king . you boggl shrewdli ; everi feather start you . 
 is thi the man you speak of ? 
 diana . ay , my lord . 
 king . tell me , sirrah-but tell me true i charg you , 
 not fear the displeasur of your master , 
 which , on your just proceed , i 'll keep off- 
 by him and by thi woman here what know you ? 
 parol . so pleas your majesti , my master hath been an honour 
 gentleman ; trick he hath had in him , which gentlemen have . 
 king . come , come , to th ' purpos . did he love thi woman ? 
 parol . faith , sir , he did love her ; but how ? 
 king . how , i pray you ? 
 parol . he did love her , sir , as a gentleman love a woman . 
 king . how is that ? 
 parol . he lov 'd her , sir , and lov 'd her not . 
 king . as thou art a knave and no knave . 
 what an equivoc companion is thi ! 
 parol . i am a poor man , and at your majesti 's command . 
 lafeu . he 's a good drum , my lord , but a naughti orat . 
 diana . do you know he promi 'd me marriag ? 
 parol . faith , i know more than i 'll speak . 
 king . but wilt thou not speak all thou know'st ? 
 parol . ye , so pleas your majesti . i did go between them , as i 
 said ; but more than that , he love her-for inde he wa mad for 
 her , and talk 'd of satan , and of limbo , and of furi , and i know 
 not what . yet i wa in that credit with them at that time that i 
 knew of their go to bed ; and of other motion , as promis 
 her marriag , and thing which would deriv me ill will to speak 
 of ; therefor i will not speak what i know . 
 king . thou hast spoken all alreadi , unless thou canst say they are 
 marri ; but thou art too fine in thi evid ; therefor stand 
 asid . 
 thi ring , you say , wa your ? 
 diana . ay , my good lord . 
 king . where did you buy it ? or who gave it you ? 
 diana . it wa not given me , nor i did not buy it . 
 king . who lent it you ? 
 diana . it wa not lent me neither . 
 king . where did you find it then ? 
 diana . i found it not . 
 king . if it were your by none of all these way , 
 how could you give it him ? 
 diana . i never gave it him . 
 lafeu . thi woman 's an easi glove , my lord ; she goe of and on at 
 pleasur . 
 king . thi ring wa mine , i gave it hi first wife . 
 diana . it might be your or her , for aught i know . 
 king . take her away , i do not like her now ; 
 to prison with her . and away with him . 
 unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst thi ring , 
 thou diest within thi hour . 
 diana . i 'll never tell you . 
 king . take her away . 
 diana . i 'll put in bail , my lieg . 
 king . i think thee now some common custom . 
 diana . by jove , if ever i knew man , 't wa you . 
 king . wherefor hast thou accu 'd him all thi while ? 
 diana . becaus he 's guilti , and he is not guilti . 
 he know i am no maid , and he 'll swear to't : 
 i 'll swear i am a maid , and he know not . 
 great king , i am no strumpet , by my life ; 
 i am either maid , or els thi old man 's wife . 
 [ point to lafeu ] 
 king . she doe abus our ear ; to prison with her . 
 diana . good mother , fetch my bail . stay , royal sir ; 
 exit widow 
 the jewel that owe the ring is sent for , 
 and he shall sureti me . but for thi lord 
 who hath abu 'd me as he know himself , 
 though yet he never harm 'd me , here i quit him . 
 he know himself my bed he hath defil 'd ; 
 and at that time he got hi wife with child . 
 dead though she be , she feel her young one kick ; 
 so there 's my riddl : one that 's dead is quick- 
 and now behold the mean . 
 
 re-ent widow with helena 
 
 king . is there no exorcist 
 beguil the truer offic of mine eye ? 
 is't real that i see ? 
 helena . no , my good lord ; 
 't is but the shadow of a wife you see , 
 the name and not the thing . 
 bertram . both , both ; o , pardon ! 
 helena . o , my good lord , when i wa like thi maid , 
 i found you wondrou kind . there is your ring , 
 and , look you , here 's your letter . thi it say : 
 'when from my finger you can get thi ring , 
 and are by me with child , ' etc . thi is done . 
 will you be mine now you are doubli won ? 
 bertram . if she , my lieg , can make me know thi clearli , 
 i 'll love her dearli , ever , ever dearli . 
 helena . if it appear not plain , and prove untru , 
 deadli divorc step between me and you ! 
 o my dear mother , do i see you live ? 
 lafeu . mine eye smell onion ; i shall weep anon . [ to parol ] 
 good tom drum , lend me a handkerch . so , i 
 thank thee . wait on me home , i 'll make sport with thee ; 
 let thi curtsi alon , they are scurvi one . 
 king . let us from point to point thi stori know , 
 to make the even truth in pleasur flow . 
 [ to diana ] if thou beest yet a fresh uncrop flower , 
 choos thou thi husband , and i 'll pay thi dower ; 
 for i can guess that by thi honest aid 
 thou kept'st a wife herself , thyself a maid.- 
 of that and all the progress , more and less , 
 resolvedli more leisur shall express . 
 all yet seem well ; and if it end so meet , 
 the bitter past , more welcom is the sweet . [ flourish ] 
 
 epilogu 
 epilogu . 
 
 king . the king 's a beggar , now the play is done . 
 all is well end if thi suit be won , 
 that you express content ; which we will pay 
 with strife to pleas you , day exceed day . 
 our be your patienc then , and your our part ; 
 your gentl hand lend us , and take our heart . 
 exeunt omn 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the tragedi of antoni and cleopatra 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 mark antoni , triumvir 
 octaviu caesar , `` 
 m. aemiliu lepidu , `` 
 sextu pompeiu , `` 
 domitiu enobarbu , friend to antoni 
 ventidiu , `` `` `` 
 ero , `` `` `` 
 scaru , `` `` `` 
 derceta , `` `` `` 
 demetriu , `` `` `` 
 philo , `` `` `` 
 maecena , friend to caesar 
 agrippa , `` `` `` 
 dolabella , `` `` `` 
 proculeiu , `` `` `` 
 thyreu , `` `` `` 
 gallu , `` `` `` 
 mena , friend to pompey 
 menecr , `` `` `` 
 varriu , `` `` `` 
 tauru , lieutenant-gener to caesar 
 canidiu , lieutenant-gener to antoni 
 siliu , an offic in ventidiu 's armi 
 euphroniu , an ambassador from antoni to caesar 
 alexa , attend on cleopatra 
 mardian , `` `` `` 
 seleucu , `` `` `` 
 diomed , `` `` `` 
 a soothsay 
 a clown 
 
 cleopatra , queen of egypt 
 octavia , sister to caesar and wife to antoni 
 charmian , ladi attend on cleopatra 
 ira , `` `` `` `` 
 
 
 
 offic , soldier , messeng , and attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 the roman empir 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter demetriu and philo 
 
 philo . nay , but thi dotag of our gener 's 
 o'erflow the measur . those hi goodli eye , 
 that o'er the file and muster of the war 
 have glow 'd like plate mar , now bend , now turn , 
 the offic and devot of their view 
 upon a tawni front . hi captain 's heart , 
 which in the scuffl of great fight hath burst 
 the buckl on hi breast , reneg all temper , 
 and is becom the bellow and the fan 
 to cool a gipsi 's lust . 
 
 flourish . enter antoni , cleopatra , her ladi , the train , 
 with eunuch fan her 
 
 look where they come ! 
 take but good note , and you shall see in him 
 the tripl pillar of the world transform 'd 
 into a strumpet 's fool . behold and see . 
 cleopatra . if it be love inde , tell me how much . 
 antoni . there 's beggari in the love that can be reckon 'd . 
 cleopatra . i 'll set a bourn how far to be belov 'd . 
 antoni . then must thou need find out new heaven , new earth . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . news , my good lord , from rome . 
 antoni . grate me the sum . 
 cleopatra . nay , hear them , antoni . 
 fulvia perchanc is angri ; or who know 
 if the scarce-beard caesar have not sent 
 hi pow'r mandat to you : 'do thi or thi ; 
 take in that kingdom and enfranchis that ; 
 perform't , or els we damn thee . ' 
 antoni . how , my love ? 
 cleopatra . perchanc ? nay , and most like , 
 you must not stay here longer ; your dismiss 
 is come from caesar ; therefor hear it , antoni . 
 where 's fulvia 's process ? caesar 's i would say ? both ? 
 call in the messeng . as i am egypt 's queen , 
 thou blushest , antoni , and that blood of thine 
 is caesar 's homag . els so thi cheek pay shame 
 when shrill-tongu 'd fulvia scold . the messeng ! 
 antoni . let rome in tiber melt , and the wide arch 
 of the rang 'd empir fall ! here is my space . 
 kingdom are clay ; our dungi earth alik 
 feed beast as man . the nobl of life 
 is to do thu [ emhrac ] , when such a mutual pair 
 and such a twain can do't , in which i bind , 
 on pain of punish , the world to weet 
 we stand up peerless . 
 cleopatra . excel falsehood ! 
 whi did he marri fulvia , and not love her ? 
 i 'll seem the fool i am not . antoni 
 will be himself . 
 antoni . but stirr 'd by cleopatra . 
 now for the love of love and her soft hour , 
 let 's not confound the time with confer harsh ; 
 there 's not a minut of our live should stretch 
 without some pleasur now . what sport to-night ? 
 cleopatra . hear the ambassador . 
 antoni . fie , wrangl queen ! 
 whom everyth becomes- to chide , to laugh , 
 to weep ; whose everi passion fulli strive 
 to make itself in thee fair and admir 'd . 
 no messeng but thine , and all alon 
 to-night we 'll wander through the street and note 
 the qualiti of peopl . come , my queen ; 
 last night you did desir it . speak not to us . 
 exeunt antoni and cleopatra , with the train 
 demetriu . is caesar with antoniu priz 'd so slight ? 
 philo . sir , sometim when he is not antoni , 
 he come too short of that great properti 
 which still should go with antoni . 
 demetriu . i am full sorri 
 that he approv the common liar , who 
 thu speak of him at rome ; but i will hope 
 of better deed to-morrow . rest you happi ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter charmian , ira , alexa , and a soothsay 
 
 charmian . lord alexa , sweet alexa , most anyth alexa , almost 
 most absolut alexa , where 's the soothsay that you prai 'd so 
 to th ' queen ? o that i knew thi husband , which you say must 
 charg hi horn with garland ! 
 alexa . soothsay ! 
 soothsay . your will ? 
 charmian . is thi the man ? is't you , sir , that know thing ? 
 soothsay . in natur 's infinit book of secreci 
 a littl i can read . 
 alexa . show him your hand . 
 
 enter enobarbu 
 
 enobarbu . bring in the banquet quickli ; wine enough 
 cleopatra 's health to drink . 
 charmian . good , sir , give me good fortun . 
 soothsay . i make not , but forese . 
 charmian . pray , then , forese me one . 
 soothsay . you shall be yet far fairer than you are . 
 charmian . he mean in flesh . 
 ira . no , you shall paint when you are old . 
 charmian . wrinkl forbid ! 
 alexa . vex not hi prescienc ; be attent . 
 charmian . hush ! 
 soothsay . you shall be more belov than belov . 
 charmian . i had rather heat my liver with drink . 
 alexa . nay , hear him . 
 charmian . good now , some excel fortun ! let me be marri to 
 three king in a forenoon , and widow them all . let me have a 
 child at fifti , to whom herod of jewri may do homag . find me to 
 marri me with octaviu caesar , and companion me with my mistress . 
 soothsay . you shall outliv the ladi whom you serv . 
 charmian . o , excel ! i love long life better than fig . 
 soothsay . you have seen and prov 'd a fairer former fortun 
 than that which is to approach . 
 charmian . then belik my children shall have no name . 
 prithe , how mani boy and wench must i have ? 
 soothsay . if everi of your wish had a womb , 
 and fertil everi wish , a million . 
 charmian . out , fool ! i forgiv thee for a witch . 
 alexa . you think none but your sheet are privi to your wish . 
 charmian . nay , come , tell ira her . 
 alexa . we 'll know all our fortun . 
 enobarbu . mine , and most of our fortun , to-night , shall be- 
 drunk to bed . 
 ira . there 's a palm presag chastiti , if noth els . 
 charmian . e'en as the o'erflow nilu presageth famin . 
 ira . go , you wild bedfellow , you can not soothsay . 
 charmian . nay , if an oili palm be not a fruit prognost , i 
 can not scratch mine ear . prithe , tell her but worky-day fortun . 
 soothsay . your fortun are alik . 
 ira . but how , but how ? give me particular . 
 soothsay . i have said . 
 ira . am i not an inch of fortun better than she ? 
 charmian . well , if you were but an inch of fortun better than i , 
 where would you choos it ? 
 ira . not in my husband 's nose . 
 charmian . our worser thought heaven mend ! alexas- come , hi 
 fortun , hi fortun ! o , let him marri a woman that can not go , 
 sweet isi , i beseech thee ! and let her die too , and give him a 
 wors ! and let wors follow wors , till the worst of all follow 
 him laugh to hi grave , fiftyfold a cuckold ! good isi , hear 
 me thi prayer , though thou deni me a matter of more weight ; good 
 isi , i beseech thee ! 
 ira . amen . dear goddess , hear that prayer of the peopl ! for , as 
 it is a heartbreak to see a handsom man loose-wiv 'd , so it is 
 a deadli sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckold . therefor , 
 dear isi , keep decorum , and fortun him accordingli ! 
 charmian . amen . 
 alexa . lo now , if it lay in their hand to make me a cuckold , they 
 would make themselv whore but they'ld do't ! 
 
 enter cleopatra 
 
 enobarbu . hush ! here come antoni . 
 charmian . not he ; the queen . 
 cleopatra . saw you my lord ? 
 enobarbu . no , ladi . 
 cleopatra . wa he not here ? 
 charmian . no , madam . 
 cleopatra . he wa dispo 'd to mirth ; but on the sudden 
 a roman thought hath struck him . enobarbu ! 
 enobarbu . madam ? 
 cleopatra . seek him , and bring him hither . where 's alexa ? 
 alexa . here , at your servic . my lord approach . 
 
 enter antoni , with a messeng and attend 
 
 cleopatra . we will not look upon him . go with us . 
 exeunt cleopatra , enobarbu , and the rest 
 messeng . fulvia thi wife first came into the field . 
 antoni . against my brother luciu ? 
 messeng . ay . 
 but soon that war had end , and the time 's state 
 made friend of them , joint their forc 'gainst caesar , 
 whose better issu in the war from itali 
 upon the first encount drave them . 
 antoni . well , what worst ? 
 messeng . the natur of bad news infect the teller . 
 antoni . when it concern the fool or coward . on ! 
 thing that are past are done with me . 't is thu : 
 who tell me true , though in hi tale lie death , 
 i hear him as he flatter 'd . 
 messeng . labienus- 
 thi is stiff news- hath with hi parthian forc 
 extend asia from euphrat , 
 hi conquer banner shook from syria 
 to lydia and to ionia , 
 whilst- 
 antoni . antoni , thou wouldst say . 
 messeng . o , my lord ! 
 antoni . speak to me home ; minc not the gener tongu ; 
 name cleopatra as she is call 'd in rome . 
 rail thou in fulvia 's phrase , and taunt my fault 
 with such full licenc as both truth and malic 
 have power to utter . o , then we bring forth weed 
 when our quick mind lie still , and our ill told us 
 is as our ear . fare thee well awhil . 
 messeng . at your nobl pleasur . exit 
 antoni . from sicyon , ho , the news ! speak there ! 
 first attend . the man from sicyon- is there such an one ? 
 second attend . he stay upon your will . 
 antoni . let him appear . 
 these strong egyptian fetter i must break , 
 or lose myself in dotag . 
 
 enter anoth messeng with a letter 
 
 what are you ? 
 second messeng . fulvia thi wife is dead . 
 antoni . where die she ? 
 second messeng . in sicyon . 
 her length of sick , with what els more seriou 
 importeth thee to know , thi bear . [ give the letter ] 
 antoni . forbear me . exit messeng 
 there 's a great spirit gone ! thu did i desir it . 
 what our contempt doth often hurl from us 
 we wish it our again ; the present pleasur , 
 by revolut low'r , doe becom 
 the opposit of itself . she 's good , be gone ; 
 the hand could pluck her back that shov 'd her on . 
 i must from thi enchant queen break off . 
 ten thousand harm , more than the ill i know , 
 my idl doth hatch . how now , enobarbu ! 
 
 re-ent enobarbu 
 
 enobarbu . what 's your pleasur , sir ? 
 antoni . i must with hast from henc . 
 enobarbu . whi , then we kill all our women . we see how mortal an 
 unkind is to them ; if they suffer our departur , death 's the 
 word . 
 antoni . i must be gone . 
 enobarbu . under a compel occas , let women die . it were piti 
 to cast them away for noth , though between them and a great 
 caus they should be esteem noth . cleopatra , catch but 
 the least nois of thi , die instantli ; i have seen her die 
 twenti time upon far poorer moment . i do think there is mettl 
 in death , which commit some love act upon her , she hath such a 
 celer in die . 
 antoni . she is cun past man 's thought . 
 enobarbu . alack , sir , no ! her passion are made of noth but the 
 finest part of pure love . we can not call her wind and water 
 sigh and tear ; they are greater storm and tempest than 
 almanac can report . thi can not be cun in her ; if it be , she 
 make a show ' r of rain as well as jove . 
 antoni . would i had never seen her ! 
 enobarbu . o sir , you had then left unseen a wonder piec of 
 work , which not to have been blest withal would have discredit 
 your travel . 
 antoni . fulvia is dead . 
 enobarbu . sir ? 
 antoni . fulvia is dead . 
 enobarbu . fulvia ? 
 antoni . dead . 
 enobarbu . whi , sir , give the god a thank sacrific . when it 
 pleaseth their deiti to take the wife of a man from him , it 
 show to man the tailor of the earth ; comfort therein that 
 when old robe are worn out there are member to make new . if 
 there were no more women but fulvia , then had you inde a cut , 
 and the case to be lament . thi grief is crown 'd with 
 consol : your old smock bring forth a new petticoat ; and 
 inde the tear live in an onion that should water thi sorrow . 
 antoni . the busi she hath broach in the state 
 can not endur my absenc . 
 enobarbu . and the busi you have broach 'd here can not be 
 without you ; especi that of cleopatra 's , which wholli depend 
 on your abod . 
 antoni . no more light answer . let our offic 
 have notic what we purpos . i shall break 
 the caus of our expedi to the queen , 
 and get her leav to part . for not alon 
 the death of fulvia , with more urgent touch , 
 do strongli speak to us ; but the letter to 
 of mani our contriv friend in rome 
 petit us at home . sextu pompeiu 
 hath given the dare to caesar , and command 
 the empir of the sea ; our slipperi peopl , 
 whose love is never link 'd to the deserv 
 till hi desert are past , begin to throw 
 pompey the great and all hi digniti 
 upon hi son ; who , high in name and power , 
 higher than both in blood and life , stand up 
 for the main soldier ; whose qualiti , go on , 
 the side o ' th ' world may danger . much is breed 
 which , like the courser 's hair , hath yet but life 
 and not a serpent 's poison . say our pleasur , 
 to such whose place is under us , requir 
 our quick remov from henc . 
 enobarbu . i shall do't . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter cleopatra , charmian , ira , and alexa 
 
 cleopatra . where is he ? 
 charmian . i did not see him sinc . 
 cleopatra . see where he is , who 's with him , what he doe . 
 i did not send you . if you find him sad , 
 say i am danc ; if in mirth , report 
 that i am sudden sick . quick , and return . exit alexa 
 charmian . madam , methink , if you did love him dearli , 
 you do not hold the method to enforc 
 the like from him . 
 cleopatra . what should i do i do not ? 
 charmian . in each thing give him way ; cross him in noth . 
 cleopatra . thou teachest like a fool- the way to lose him . 
 charmian . tempt him not so too far ; i wish , forbear ; 
 in time we hate that which we often fear . 
 
 enter antoni 
 
 but here come antoni . 
 cleopatra . i am sick and sullen . 
 antoni . i am sorri to give breath to my purpose- 
 cleopatra . help me away , dear charmian ; i shall fall . 
 it can not be thu long ; the side of natur 
 will not sustain it . 
 antoni . now , my dearest queen- 
 cleopatra . pray you , stand farther from me . 
 antoni . what 's the matter ? 
 cleopatra . i know by that same eye there 's some good news . 
 what say the marri woman ? you may go . 
 would she had never given you leav to come ! 
 let her not say 't is i that keep you here- 
 i have no power upon you ; her you are . 
 antoni . the god best know- 
 cleopatra . o , never wa there queen 
 so mightili betray 'd ! yet at the first 
 i saw the treason plant . 
 antoni . cleopatra- 
 cleopatra . whi should i think you can be mine and true , 
 though you in swear shake the throne god , 
 who have been fals to fulvia ? riotou mad , 
 to be entangl with those mouth-mad vow , 
 which break themselv in swear ! 
 antoni . most sweet queen- 
 cleopatra . nay , pray you seek no colour for your go , 
 but bid farewel , and go . when you su stay , 
 then wa the time for word . no go then ! 
 etern wa in our lip and eye , 
 bliss in our brow ' bent , none our part so poor 
 but wa a race of heaven . they are so still , 
 or thou , the greatest soldier of the world , 
 art turn 'd the greatest liar . 
 antoni . how now , ladi ! 
 cleopatra . i would i had thi inch . thou shouldst know 
 there were a heart in egypt . 
 antoni . hear me , queen : 
 the strong necess of time command 
 our servic awhil ; but my full heart 
 remain in use with you . our itali 
 shine o'er with civil sword : sextu pompeiu 
 make hi approach to the port of rome ; 
 equal of two domest power 
 breed scrupul faction ; the hate , grown to strength , 
 are newli grown to love . the condemn 'd pompey , 
 rich in hi father 's honour , creep apac 
 into the heart of such as have not thrive 
 upon the present state , whose number threaten ; 
 and quiet , grown sick of rest , would purg 
 by ani desper chang . my more particular , 
 and that which most with you should safe my go , 
 is fulvia 's death . 
 cleopatra . though age from folli could not give me freedom , 
 it doe from childish . can fulvia die ? 
 antoni . she 's dead , my queen . 
 look here , and at thi sovereign leisur read 
 the garboil she awak 'd . at the last , best . 
 see when and where she die . 
 cleopatra . o most fals love ! 
 where be the sacr vial thou shouldst fill 
 with sorrow water ? now i see , i see , 
 in fulvia 's death how mine receiv 'd shall be . 
 antoni . quarrel no more , but be prepar 'd to know 
 the purpos i bear ; which are , or ceas , 
 as you shall give th ' advic . by the fire 
 that quicken nilu ' slime , i go from henc 
 thi soldier , servant , make peac or war 
 as thou affect . 
 cleopatra . cut my lace , charmian , come ! 
 but let it be ; i am quickli ill and well- 
 so antoni love . 
 antoni . my preciou queen , forbear , 
 and give true evid to hi love , which stand 
 an honour trial . 
 cleopatra . so fulvia told me . 
 i prithe turn asid and weep for her ; 
 then bid adieu to me , and say the tear 
 belong to egypt . good now , play one scene 
 of excel dissembl , and let it look 
 like perfect honour . 
 antoni . you 'll heat my blood ; no more . 
 cleopatra . you can do better yet ; but thi is meetli . 
 antoni . now , by my sword- 
 cleopatra . and target . still he mend ; 
 but thi is not the best . look , prithe , charmian , 
 how thi herculean roman doe becom 
 the carriag of hi chafe . 
 antoni . i 'll leav you , ladi . 
 cleopatra . courteou lord , one word . 
 sir , you and i must part- but that 's not it . 
 sir , you and i have lov'd- but there 's not it . 
 that you know well . someth it is i would- 
 o , my oblivion is a veri antoni , 
 and i am all forgotten ! 
 antoni . but that your royalti 
 hold idl your subject , i should take you 
 for idl itself . 
 cleopatra . 't is sweat labour 
 to bear such idl so near the heart 
 as cleopatra thi . but , sir , forgiv me ; 
 sinc my becom kill me when they do not 
 eye well to you . your honour call you henc ; 
 therefor be deaf to my unpiti folli , 
 and all the god go with you ! upon your sword 
 sit laurel victori , and smooth success 
 be strew 'd befor your feet ! 
 antoni . let us go . come . 
 our separ so abid and fli 
 that thou , resid here , goe yet with me , 
 and i , henc fleet , here remain with thee . 
 away ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 rome . caesar 's hous 
 
 enter octaviu caesar , read a letter ; lepidu , and their train 
 
 caesar . you may see , lepidu , and henceforth know , 
 it is not caesar 's natur vice to hate 
 our great competitor . from alexandria 
 thi is the news : he fish , drink , and wast 
 the lamp of night in revel ; is not more manlik 
 than cleopatra , nor the queen of ptolemi 
 more womanli than he ; hardli gave audienc , or 
 vouchsaf 'd to think he had partner . you shall find there 
 a man who is the abstract of all fault 
 that all men follow . 
 lepidu . i must not think there are 
 evil enow to darken all hi good . 
 hi fault , in him , seem as the spot of heaven , 
 more fieri by night 's black ; hereditari 
 rather than purcha 'd ; what he can not chang 
 than what he choos . 
 caesar . you are too indulg . let 's grant it is not 
 amiss to tumbl on the bed of ptolemi , 
 to give a kingdom for a mirth , to sit 
 and keep the turn of tippl with a slave , 
 to reel the street at noon , and stand the buffet 
 with knave that smell of sweat . say thi becom him- 
 as hi composur must be rare inde 
 whom these thing can not blemish- yet must antoni 
 no way excus hi foil when we do bear 
 so great weight in hi light . if he fill 'd 
 hi vacanc with hi voluptu , 
 full surfeit and the dryness of hi bone 
 call on him for't ! but to confound such time 
 that drum him from hi sport and speak as loud 
 as hi own state and ours- 't is to be chid 
 as we rate boy who , be matur in knowledg , 
 pawn their experi to their present pleasur , 
 and so rebel to judgment . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 lepidu . here 's more news . 
 messeng . thi bid have been done ; and everi hour , 
 most nobl caesar , shalt thou have report 
 how 't is abroad . pompey is strong at sea , 
 and it appear he is belov 'd of those 
 that onli have fear 'd caesar . to the port 
 the discont repair , and men 's report 
 give him much wrong 'd . 
 caesar . i should have known no less . 
 it hath been taught us from the primal state 
 that he which is wa wish 'd until he were ; 
 and the ebb 'd man , ne'er lov 'd till ne'er worth love , 
 come dear 'd by be lack 'd . thi common bodi , 
 like to a vagabond flag upon the stream , 
 goe to and back , lackey the vari tide , 
 to rot itself with motion . 
 messeng . caesar , i bring thee word 
 menecr and mena , famou pirat , 
 make the sea serv them , which they ear and wound 
 with keel of everi kind . mani hot inroad 
 they make in itali ; the border maritim 
 lack blood to think o n't , and flush youth revolt . 
 no vessel can peep forth but 't is as soon 
 taken as seen ; for pompey 's name strike more 
 than could hi war resist . 
 caesar . antoni , 
 leav thi lascivi wassail . when thou onc 
 wa beaten from modena , where thou slew'st 
 hirtiu and pansa , consul , at thi heel 
 did famin follow ; whom thou fought'st against , 
 though daintili brought up , with patienc more 
 than savag could suffer . thou didst drink 
 the stale of hors and the gild puddl 
 which beast would cough at . thi palat then did deign 
 the roughest berri on the rudest hedg ; 
 yea , like the stag when snow the pastur sheet , 
 the bark of tree thou brow 'd . on the alp 
 it is report thou didst eat strang flesh , 
 which some did die to look on . and all this- 
 it wound thine honour that i speak it now- 
 wa born so like a soldier that thi cheek 
 so much as lank 'd not . 
 lepidu . 't is piti of him . 
 caesar . let hi shame quickli 
 drive him to rome . 't is time we twain 
 did show ourselv i ' th ' field ; and to that end 
 assembl we immedi council . pompey 
 thrive in our idl . 
 lepidu . to-morrow , caesar , 
 i shall be furnish 'd to inform you rightli 
 both what by sea and land i can be abl 
 to front thi present time . 
 caesar . till which encount 
 it is my busi too . farewel . 
 lepidu . farewel , my lord . what you shall know meantim 
 of stir abroad , i shall beseech you , sir , 
 to let me be partak . 
 caesar . doubt not , sir ; 
 i knew it for my bond . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter cleopatra , charmian , ira , and mardian 
 
 cleopatra . charmian ! 
 charmian . madam ? 
 cleopatra . ha , ha ! 
 give me to drink mandragora . 
 charmian . whi , madam ? 
 cleopatra . that i might sleep out thi great gap of time 
 my antoni is away . 
 charmian . you think of him too much . 
 cleopatra . o , 't is treason ! 
 charmian . madam , i trust , not so . 
 cleopatra . thou , eunuch mardian ! 
 mardian . what 's your high ' pleasur ? 
 cleopatra . not now to hear thee sing ; i take no pleasur 
 in aught an eunuch ha . 't is well for thee 
 that , be unseminar 'd , thi freer thought 
 may not fli forth of egypt . hast thou affect ? 
 mardian . ye , graciou madam . 
 cleopatra . inde ? 
 mardian . not in deed , madam ; for i can do noth 
 but what inde is honest to be done . 
 yet have i fierc affect , and think 
 what venu did with mar . 
 cleopatra . o charmian , 
 where think'st thou he is now ? stand he or sit he ? 
 or doe he walk ? or is he on hi hors ? 
 o happi hors , to bear the weight of antoni ! 
 do brave , hors ; for wot'st thou whom thou mov'st ? 
 the demi-atla of thi earth , the arm 
 and burgonet of men . he 's speak now , 
 or murmur 'where 's my serpent of old nile ? ' 
 for so he call me . now i feed myself 
 with most delici poison . think on me , 
 that am with phoebu ' amor pinch black , 
 and wrinkl deep in time ? broad-front caesar , 
 when thou wast here abov the ground , i wa 
 a morsel for a monarch ; and great pompey 
 would stand and make hi eye grow in my brow ; 
 there would he anchor hi aspect and die 
 with look on hi life . 
 
 enter alexa 
 
 alexa . sovereign of egypt , hail ! 
 cleopatra . how much unlik art thou mark antoni ! 
 yet , come from him , that great med'cin hath 
 with hi tinct gild thee . 
 how goe it with my brave mark antoni ? 
 alexa . last thing he did , dear queen , 
 he kiss'd- the last of mani doubl kisses- 
 thi orient pearl . hi speech stick in my heart . 
 cleopatra . mine ear must pluck it thenc . 
 alexa . 'good friend , ' quoth he 
 'say the firm roman to great egypt send 
 thi treasur of an oyster ; at whose foot , 
 to mend the petti present , i will piec 
 her opul throne with kingdom . all the east , 
 say thou , shall call her mistress . ' so he nod , 
 and soberli did mount an arm-gaunt steed , 
 who neigh 'd so high that what i would have spoke 
 wa beastli dumb 'd by him . 
 cleopatra . what , wa he sad or merri ? 
 alexa . like to the time o ' th ' year between the extrem 
 of hot and cold ; he wa nor sad nor merri . 
 cleopatra . o well-divid disposit ! note him , 
 note him , good charmian ; 't is the man ; but note him ! 
 he wa not sad , for he would shine on those 
 that make their look by hi ; he wa not merri , 
 which seem 'd to tell them hi remembr lay 
 in egypt with hi joy ; but between both . 
 o heavenli mingl ! be'st thou sad or merri , 
 the violenc of either thee becom , 
 so doe it no man els . met'st thou my post ? 
 alexa . ay , madam , twenti sever messeng . 
 whi do you send so thick ? 
 cleopatra . who 's born that day 
 when i forget to send to antoni 
 shall die a beggar . ink and paper , charmian . 
 welcom , my good alexa . did i , charmian , 
 ever love caesar so ? 
 charmian . o that brave caesar ! 
 cleopatra . be chok 'd with such anoth emphasi ! 
 say 'the brave antoni . ' 
 charmian . the valiant caesar ! 
 cleopatra . by isi , i will give thee bloodi teeth 
 if thou with caesar paragon again 
 my man of men . 
 charmian . by your most graciou pardon , 
 i sing but after you . 
 cleopatra . my salad day , 
 when i wa green in judgment , cold in blood , 
 to say as i said then . but come , away ! 
 get me ink and paper . 
 he shall have everi day a sever greet , 
 or i 'll unpeopl egypt . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 messina . pompey 's hous 
 
 enter pompey , menecr , and mena , in warlik manner 
 
 pompey . if the great god be just , they shall assist 
 the deed of justest men . 
 menecr . know , worthi pompey , 
 that what they do delay they not deni . 
 pompey . while we are suitor to their throne , decay 
 the thing we sue for . 
 menecr . we , ignor of ourselv , 
 beg often our own harm , which the wise pow'r 
 deni us for our good ; so find we profit 
 by lose of our prayer . 
 pompey . i shall do well . 
 the peopl love me , and the sea is mine ; 
 my power are crescent , and my augur hope 
 say it will come to th ' full . mark antoni 
 in egypt sit at dinner , and will make 
 no war without door . caesar get money where 
 he lose heart . lepidu flatter both , 
 of both is flatter 'd ; but he neither love , 
 nor either care for him . 
 mena . caesar and lepidu 
 are in the field . a mighti strength they carri . 
 pompey . where have you thi ? 't is fals . 
 mena . from silviu , sir . 
 pompey . he dream . i know they are in rome togeth , 
 look for antoni . but all the charm of love , 
 salt cleopatra , soften thi wan 'd lip ! 
 let witchcraft join with beauti , lust with both ; 
 tie up the libertin in a field of feast , 
 keep hi brain fume . epicurean cook 
 sharpen with cloyless sauc hi appetit , 
 that sleep and feed may prorogu hi honour 
 even till a leth 'd dullness- 
 
 enter varriu 
 
 how now , varriu ! 
 varriu . thi is most certain that i shall deliv : 
 mark antoni is everi hour in rome 
 expect . sinc he went from egypt 't is 
 a space for farther travel . 
 pompey . i could have given less matter 
 a better ear . mena , i did not think 
 thi amor surfeit would have donn 'd hi helm 
 for such a petti war ; hi soldiership 
 is twice the other twain . but let us rear 
 the higher our opinion , that our stir 
 can from the lap of egypt 's widow pluck 
 the ne'er-lust-weari antoni . 
 mena . i can not hope 
 caesar and antoni shall well greet togeth . 
 hi wife that 's dead did trespass to caesar ; 
 hi brother warr 'd upon him ; although , i think , 
 not mov 'd by antoni . 
 pompey . i know not , mena , 
 how lesser enmiti may give way to greater . 
 were't not that we stand up against them all , 
 'twere pregnant they should squar between themselv ; 
 for they have entertain caus enough 
 to draw their sword . but how the fear of us 
 may cement their divis , and bind up 
 the petti differ we yet not know . 
 be't as our god will have't ! it onli stand 
 our live upon to use our strongest hand . 
 come , mena . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 rome . the hous of lepidu 
 
 enter enobarbu and lepidu 
 
 lepidu . good enobarbu , 't is a worthi deed , 
 and shall becom you well , to entreat your captain 
 to soft and gentl speech . 
 enobarbu . i shall entreat him 
 to answer like himself . if caesar move him , 
 let antoni look over caesar 's head 
 and speak as loud as mar . by jupit , 
 were i the wearer of antoniu ' beard , 
 i would not shave't to-day . 
 lepidu . 't is not a time 
 for privat stomach . 
 enobarbu . everi time 
 serv for the matter that is then born i n't . 
 lepidu . but small to greater matter must give way . 
 enobarbu . not if the small come first . 
 lepidu . your speech is passion ; 
 but pray you stir no ember up . here come 
 the nobl antoni . 
 
 enter antoni and ventidiu 
 
 enobarbu . and yonder , caesar . 
 
 enter caesar , maecena , and agrippa 
 
 antoni . if we compos well here , to parthia . 
 hark , ventidiu . 
 caesar . i do not know , maecena . ask agrippa . 
 lepidu . nobl friend , 
 that which combin 'd us wa most great , and let not 
 a leaner action rend us . what 's amiss , 
 may it be gentli heard . when we debat 
 our trivial differ loud , we do commit 
 murder in heal wound . then , nobl partner , 
 the rather for i earnestli beseech , 
 touch you the sourest point with sweetest term , 
 nor curst grow to th ' matter . 
 antoni . 't is spoken well . 
 were we befor our arini , and to fight , 
 i should do thu . [ flourish ] 
 caesar . welcom to rome . 
 antoni . thank you . 
 caesar . sit . 
 antoni . sit , sir . 
 caesar . nay , then . [ they sit ] 
 antoni . i learn you take thing ill which are not so , 
 or be , concern you not . 
 caesar . i must be laugh 'd at 
 if , or for noth or a littl , 
 should say myself offend , and with you 
 chiefli i ' the world ; more laugh 'd at that i should 
 onc name you derog when to sound your name 
 it not concern 'd me . 
 antoni . my be in egypt , caesar , 
 what was't to you ? 
 caesar . no more than my resid here at rome 
 might be to you in egypt . yet , if you there 
 did practis on my state , your be in egypt 
 might be my question . 
 antoni . how intend you- practi 'd ? 
 caesar . you may be plea 'd to catch at mine intent 
 by what did here befal me . your wife and brother 
 made war upon me , and their contest 
 wa theme for you ; you were the word of war . 
 antoni . you do mistak your busi ; my brother never 
 did urg me in hi act . i did inquir it , 
 and have my learn from some true report 
 that drew their sword with you . did he not rather 
 discredit my author with your , 
 and make the war alik against my stomach , 
 have alik your caus ? of thi my letter 
 befor did satisfi you . if you 'll patch a quarrel , 
 as matter whole you have not to make it with , 
 it must not be with thi . 
 caesar . you prais yourself 
 by lay defect of judgment to me ; but 
 you patch 'd up your excus . 
 antoni . not so , not so ; 
 i know you could not lack , i am certain o n't , 
 veri necess of thi thought , that i , 
 your partner in the caus 'gainst which he fought , 
 could not with grace eye attend those war 
 which front mine own peac . as for my wife , 
 i would you had her spirit in such anoth ! 
 the third o ' th ' world is your , which with a snaffl 
 you may pace easi , but not such a wife . 
 enobarbu . would we had all such wive , that the men might go to 
 war with the women ! 
 antoni . so much uncurb , her garboil , caesar , 
 made out of her impatience- which not want 
 shrewd of polici too- i griev grant 
 did you too much disquiet . for that you must 
 but say i could not help it . 
 caesar . i wrote to you 
 when riot in alexandria ; you 
 did pocket up my letter , and with taunt 
 did gibe my missiv out of audienc . 
 antoni . sir , 
 he fell upon me ere admit . then 
 three king i had newli feast , and did want 
 of what i wa i ' th ' morn ; but next day 
 i told him of myself , which wa as much 
 as to have ask 'd him pardon . let thi fellow 
 be noth of our strife ; if we contend , 
 out of our question wipe him . 
 caesar . you have broken 
 the articl of your oath , which you shall never 
 have tongu to charg me with . 
 lepidu . soft , caesar ! 
 antoni . no ; 
 lepidu , let him speak . 
 the honour is sacr which he talk on now , 
 suppos that i lack 'd it . but on , caesar : 
 the articl of my oath- 
 caesar . to lend me arm and aid when i requir 'd them , 
 the which you both deni . 
 antoni . neglect , rather ; 
 and then when poison hour had bound me up 
 from mine own knowledg . as nearli as i may , 
 i 'll play the penit to you ; but mine honesti 
 shall not make poor my great , nor my power 
 work without it . truth is , that fulvia , 
 to have me out of egypt , made war here ; 
 for which myself , the ignor motiv , do 
 so far ask pardon as befit mine honour 
 to stoop in such a case . 
 lepidu . 't is nobl spoken . 
 maecena . if it might pleas you to enforc no further 
 the grief between ye- to forget them quit 
 were to rememb that the present need 
 speak to aton you . 
 lepidu . worthili spoken , maecena . 
 enobarbu . or , if you borrow one anoth 's love for the instant , 
 you may , when you hear no more word of pompey , return it again . 
 you shall have time to wrangl in when you have noth els to 
 do . 
 antoni . thou art a soldier onli . speak no more . 
 enobarbu . that truth should be silent i had almost forgot . 
 antoni . you wrong thi presenc ; therefor speak no more . 
 enobarbu . go to , then- your consider stone ! 
 caesar . i do not much dislik the matter , but 
 the manner of hi speech ; for't can not be 
 we shall remain in friendship , our condit 
 so diff'r in their act . yet if i knew 
 what hoop should hold us stanch , from edg to edg 
 o ' th ' world , i would pursu it . 
 agrippa . give me leav , caesar . 
 caesar . speak , agrippa . 
 agrippa . thou hast a sister by the mother 's side , 
 admir 'd octavia . great mark antoni 
 is now a widow . 
 caesar . say not so , agrippa . 
 if cleopatra heard you , your reproof 
 were well deserv 'd of rash . 
 antoni . i am not marri , caesar . let me hear 
 agrippa further speak . 
 agrippa . to hold you in perpetu amiti , 
 to make you brother , and to knit your heart 
 with an unslip knot , take antoni 
 octavia to hi wife ; whose beauti claim 
 no wors a husband than the best of men ; 
 whose virtu and whose gener grace speak 
 that which none els can utter . by thi marriag 
 all littl jealousi , which now seem great , 
 and all great fear , which now import their danger , 
 would then be noth . truth would be tale , 
 where now half tale be truth . her love to both 
 would each to other , and all love to both , 
 draw after her . pardon what i have spoke ; 
 for 't is a studi , not a present thought , 
 by duti rumin . 
 antoni . will caesar speak ? 
 caesar . not till he hear how antoni is touch 'd 
 with what is spoke alreadi . 
 antoni . what power is in agrippa , 
 if i would say 'agrippa , be it so , ' 
 to make thi good ? 
 caesar . the power of caesar , and 
 hi power unto octavia . 
 antoni . may i never 
 to thi good purpos , that so fairli show , 
 dream of impedi ! let me have thi hand . 
 further thi act of grace ; and from thi hour 
 the heart of brother govern in our love 
 and sway our great design ! 
 caesar . there is my hand . 
 a sister i bequeath you , whom no brother 
 did ever love so dearli . let her live 
 to join our kingdom and our heart ; and never 
 fli off our love again ! 
 lepidu . happili , amen ! 
 antoni . i did not think to draw my sword 'gainst pompey ; 
 for he hath laid strang courtesi and great 
 of late upon me . i must thank him onli , 
 lest my remembr suffer ill report ; 
 at heel of that , defi him . 
 lepidu . time call upon 's . 
 of us must pompey present be sought , 
 or els he seek out us . 
 antoni . where lie he ? 
 caesar . about the mount misenum . 
 antoni . what is hi strength by land ? 
 caesar . great and increas ; but by sea 
 he is an absolut master . 
 antoni . so is the fame . 
 would we had spoke togeth ! hast we for it . 
 yet , ere we put ourselv in arm , dispatch we 
 the busi we have talk 'd of . 
 caesar . with most glad ; 
 and do invit you to my sister 's view , 
 whither straight i 'll lead you . 
 antoni . let us , lepidu , 
 not lack your compani . 
 lepidu . nobl antoni , 
 not sick should detain me . [ flourish ] 
 exeunt all but enobarbu , agrippa , maecena 
 maecena . welcom from egypt , sir . 
 enobarbu . half the heart of caesar , worthi maecena ! my honour 
 friend , agrippa ! 
 agrippa . good enobarbu ! 
 maecena . we have caus to be glad that matter are so well 
 digest . you stay 'd well by't in egypt . 
 enobarbu . ay , sir ; we did sleep day out of counten and made 
 the night light with drink . 
 maecena . eight wild boar roast whole at a breakfast , and but 
 twelv person there . is thi true ? 
 enobarbu . thi wa but as a fli by an eagl . we had much more 
 monstrou matter of feast , which worthili deserv note . 
 maecena . she 's a most triumphant ladi , if report be squar to her . 
 enobarbu . when she first met mark antoni she pur 'd up hi heart , 
 upon the river of cydnu . 
 agrippa . there she appear 'd inde ! or my report devi 'd well for 
 her . 
 enobarbu . i will tell you . 
 the barg she sat in , like a burnish 'd throne , 
 burn 'd on the water . the poop wa beaten gold ; 
 purpl the sail , and so perfum that 
 the wind were love-sick with them ; the oar were silver , 
 which to the tune of flute kept stroke , and made 
 the water which they beat to follow faster , 
 as amor of their stroke . for her own person , 
 it beggar 'd all descript . she did lie 
 in her pavilion , cloth-of-gold , of tissu , 
 o'erpictur that venu where we see 
 the fanci out-work natur . on each side her 
 stood pretti dimpl boy , like smile cupid , 
 with divers-colour 'd fan , whose wind did seem 
 to glow the delic cheek which they did cool , 
 and what they undid did . 
 agrippa . o , rare for antoni ! 
 enobarbu . her gentlewomen , like the nereid , 
 so mani mermaid , tend her i ' th ' eye , 
 and made their bend adorn . at the helm 
 a seem mermaid steer . the silken tackl 
 swell with the touch of those flower-soft hand 
 that yare frame the offic . from the barg 
 a strang invis perfum hit the sens 
 of the adjac wharf . the citi cast 
 her peopl out upon her ; and antoni , 
 enthron 'd i ' th ' market-plac , did sit alon , 
 whistl to th ' air ; which , but for vacanc , 
 had gone to gaze on cleopatra too , 
 and made a gap in natur . 
 agrippa . rare egyptian ! 
 enobarbu . upon her land , antoni sent to her , 
 invit her to supper . she repli 
 it should be better he becam her guest ; 
 which she entreat . our courteou antoni , 
 whom ne'er the word of 'no ' woman heard speak , 
 be barber 'd ten time o'er , goe to the feast , 
 and for hi ordinari pay hi heart 
 for what hi eye eat onli . 
 agrippa . royal wench ! 
 she made great caesar lay hi sword to bed . 
 he plough her , and she cropp 'd . 
 enobarbu . i saw her onc 
 hop forti pace through the public street ; 
 and , have lost her breath , she spoke , and pant , 
 that she did make defect perfect , 
 and , breathless , pow ' r breath forth . 
 maecena . now antoni must leav her utterli . 
 enobarbu . never ! he will not . 
 age can not wither her , nor custom stale 
 her infinit varieti . other women cloy 
 the appetit they feed , but she make hungri 
 where most she satisfi ; for vilest thing 
 becom themselv in her , that the holi priest 
 bless her when she is riggish . 
 maecena . if beauti , wisdom , modesti , can settl 
 the heart of antoni , octavia is 
 a bless lotteri to him . 
 agrippa . let us go . 
 good enobarbu , make yourself my guest 
 whilst you abid here . 
 enobarbu . humbl , sir , i thank you . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 rome . caesar 's hous 
 
 enter antoni , caesar , octavia between them 
 
 antoni . the world and my great offic will sometim 
 divid me from your bosom . 
 octavia . all which time 
 befor the god my knee shall bow my prayer 
 to them for you . 
 antoni . good night , sir . my octavia , 
 read not my blemish in the world 's report . 
 i have not kept my squar ; but that to come 
 shall all be done by th ' rule . good night , dear ladi . 
 octavia . good night , sir . 
 caesar . good night . exeunt caesar and octavia 
 
 enter soothsay 
 
 antoni . now , sirrah , you do wish yourself in egypt ? 
 soothsay . would i had never come from thenc , nor you thither ! 
 antoni . if you can- your reason . 
 soothsay . i see it in my motion , have it not in my tongu ; but 
 yet hie you to egypt again . 
 antoni . say to me , 
 whose fortun shall rise higher , caesar 's or mine ? 
 soothsay . caesar 's . 
 therefor , o antoni , stay not by hi side . 
 thi daemon , that thi spirit which keep thee , is 
 nobl , courag , high , unmatch , 
 where caesar 's is not ; but near him thi angel 
 becom a fear , as be o'erpow ' r 'd . therefor 
 make space enough between you . 
 antoni . speak thi no more . 
 soothsay . to none but thee ; no more but when to thee . 
 if thou dost play with him at ani game , 
 thou art sure to lose ; and of that natur luck 
 he beat thee 'gainst the odd . thi lustr thicken 
 when he shine by . i say again , thi spirit 
 is all afraid to govern thee near him ; 
 but , he away , 't is nobl . 
 antoni . get thee gone . 
 say to ventidiu i would speak with him . 
 exit soothsay 
 he shall to parthia.- be it art or hap , 
 he hath spoken true . the veri dice obey him ; 
 and in our sport my better cun faint 
 under hi chanc . if we draw lot , he speed ; 
 hi cock do win the battl still of mine , 
 when it is all to nought , and hi quail ever 
 beat mine , inhoop 'd , at odd . i will to egypt ; 
 and though i make thi marriag for my peac , 
 i ' th ' east my pleasur lie . 
 
 enter ventidiu 
 
 o , come , ventidiu , 
 you must to parthia . your commiss 's readi ; 
 follow me and receive't . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 rome . a street 
 
 enter lepidu , maecena , and agrippa 
 
 lepidu . troubl yourselv no further . pray you hasten 
 your gener after . 
 agrippa . sir , mark antoni 
 will e'en but kiss octavia , and we 'll follow . 
 lepidu . till i shall see you in your soldier 's dress , 
 which will becom you both , farewel . 
 maecena . we shall , 
 as i conceiv the journey , be at th ' mount 
 befor you , lepidu . 
 lepidu . your way is shorter ; 
 my purpos do draw me much about . 
 you 'll win two day upon me . 
 both . sir , good success ! 
 lepidu . farewel . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter cleopatra , charmian , ira , and alexa 
 
 cleopatra . give me some music- music , moodi food 
 of us that trade in love . 
 all . the music , ho ! 
 
 enter mardian the eunuch 
 
 cleopatra . let it alon ! let 's to billiard . come , charmian . 
 charmian . my arm is sore ; best play with mardian . 
 cleopatra . as well a woman with an eunuch play 'd 
 as with a woman . come , you 'll play with me , sir ? 
 mardian . as well as i can , madam . 
 cleopatra . and when good will is show 'd , though't come too short , 
 the actor may plead pardon . i 'll none now . 
 give me mine angle- we 'll to th ' river . there , 
 my music play far off , i will betray 
 tawny-finn 'd fish ; my bend hook shall pierc 
 their slimi jaw ; and as i draw them up 
 i 'll think them everi one an antoni , 
 and say 'ah ha ! y'are caught . ' 
 charmian . 't wa merri when 
 you wager 'd on your angl ; when your diver 
 did hang a salt fish on hi hook , which he 
 with fervenc drew up . 
 cleopatra . that time ? o time 
 i laugh him out of patienc ; and that night 
 i laugh 'd him into patienc ; and next morn , 
 ere the ninth hour , i drunk him to hi bed , 
 then put my tire and mantl on him , whilst 
 i wore hi sword philippan . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 o ! from itali ? 
 ram thou thi fruit tide in mine ear , 
 that long time have been barren . 
 messeng . madam , madam- 
 cleopatra . antoni 's dead ! if thou say so , villain , 
 thou kill'st thi mistress ; but well and free , 
 if thou so yield him , there is gold , and here 
 my bluest vein to kiss- a hand that king 
 have lipp 'd , and trembl kiss . 
 messeng . first , madam , he is well . 
 cleopatra . whi , there 's more gold . 
 but , sirrah , mark , we use 
 to say the dead are well . bring it to that , 
 the gold i give thee will i melt and pour 
 down thi ill-utt throat . 
 messeng . good madam , hear me . 
 cleopatra . well , go to , i will . 
 but there 's no good in thi face . if antoni 
 be free and healthful- whi so tart a favour 
 to trumpet such good tide ? if not well , 
 thou shouldst come like a furi crown 'd with snake , 
 not like a formal man . 
 messeng . will't pleas you hear me ? 
 cleopatra . i have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st . 
 yet , if thou say antoni live , is well , 
 or friend with caesar , or not captiv to him , 
 i 'll set thee in a shower of gold , and hail 
 rich pearl upon thee . 
 messeng . madam , he 's well . 
 cleopatra . well said . 
 messeng . and friend with caesar . 
 cleopatra . th'art an honest man . 
 messeng . caesar and he are greater friend than ever . 
 cleopatra . make thee a fortun from me . 
 messeng . but yet , madam- 
 cleopatra . i do not like 'but yet . ' it doe allay 
 the good preced ; fie upon 'but yet ' ! 
 'but yet ' is as a gaoler to bring forth 
 some monstrou malefactor . prithe , friend , 
 pour out the pack of matter to mine ear , 
 the good and bad togeth . he 's friend with caesar ; 
 in state of health , thou say'st ; and , thou say'st , free . 
 messeng . free , madam ! no ; i made no such report . 
 he 's bound unto octavia . 
 cleopatra . for what good turn ? 
 messeng . for the best turn i ' th ' bed . 
 cleopatra . i am pale , charmian . 
 messeng . madam , he 's marri to octavia . 
 cleopatra . the most infecti pestil upon thee ! 
 [ strike him down ] 
 messeng . good madam , patienc . 
 cleopatra . what say you ? henc , [ strike him ] 
 horribl villain ! or i 'll spurn thine eye 
 like ball befor me ; i 'll unhair thi head ; 
 [ she hale him up and down ] 
 thou shalt be whipp 'd with wire and stew 'd in brine , 
 smart in ling'r pickl . 
 messeng . graciou madam , 
 i that do bring the news made not the match . 
 cleopatra . say 't is not so , a provinc i will give thee , 
 and make thi fortun proud . the blow thou hadst 
 shall make thi peac for move me to rage ; 
 and i will boot thee with what gift besid 
 thi modesti can beg . 
 messeng . he 's marri , madam . 
 cleopatra . rogu , thou hast liv 'd too long . [ draw a knife ] 
 messeng . nay , then i 'll run . 
 what mean you , madam ? i have made no fault . exit 
 charmian . good madam , keep yourself within yourself : 
 the man is innoc . 
 cleopatra . some innoc scape not the thunderbolt . 
 melt egypt into nile ! and kindli creatur 
 turn all to serpent ! call the slave again . 
 though i am mad , i will not bite him . call ! 
 charmian . he is afear 'd to come . 
 cleopatra . i will not hurt him . 
 these hand do lack nobil , that they strike 
 a meaner than myself ; sinc i myself 
 have given myself the caus . 
 
 enter the messeng again 
 
 come hither , sir . 
 though it be honest , it is never good 
 to bring bad news . give to a graciou messag 
 an host of tongu ; but let ill tide tell 
 themselv when they be felt . 
 messeng . i have done my duti . 
 cleopatra . is he marri ? 
 i can not hate thee worser than i do 
 if thou again say 'ye . ' 
 messeng . he 's marri , madam . 
 cleopatra . the god confound thee ! dost thou hold there still ? 
 messeng . should i lie , madam ? 
 cleopatra . o , i would thou didst , 
 so half my egypt were submerg 'd and made 
 a cistern for scal 'd snake ! go , get thee henc . 
 hadst thou narcissu in thi face , to me 
 thou wouldst appear most ugli . he is marri ? 
 messeng . i crave your high ' pardon . 
 cleopatra . he is marri ? 
 messeng . take no offenc that i would not offend you ; 
 to punish me for what you make me do 
 seem much unequ . he 's marri to octavia . 
 cleopatra . o , that hi fault should make a knave of thee 
 that art not what th'art sure of ! get thee henc . 
 the merchandis which thou hast brought from rome 
 are all too dear for me . lie they upon thi hand , 
 and be undon by 'em ! exit messeng 
 charmian . good your high , patienc . 
 cleopatra . in prais antoni i have disprai 'd caesar . 
 charmian . mani time , madam . 
 cleopatra . i am paid for't now . lead me from henc , 
 i faint . o ira , charmian ! 't is no matter . 
 go to the fellow , good alexa ; bid him 
 report the featur of octavia , her year , 
 her inclin ; let him not leav out 
 the colour of her hair . bring me word quickli . 
 exit alexa 
 let him for ever go- let him not , charmian- 
 though he be paint one way like a gorgon , 
 the other way 's a mar . [ to mardian ] 
 bid you alexa 
 bring me word how tall she is.- piti me , charmian , 
 but do not speak to me . lead me to my chamber . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 near misenum 
 
 flourish . enter pompey and mena at one door , with drum and trumpet ; 
 at anoth , caesar , antoni , lepidu , enobarbu , maecena , agrippa , 
 with soldier march 
 
 pompey . your hostag i have , so have you mine ; 
 and we shall talk befor we fight . 
 caesar . most meet 
 that first we come to word ; and therefor have we 
 our written purpos befor us sent ; 
 which if thou hast consid , let us know 
 if 'twill tie up thi discont sword 
 and carri back to sicili much tall youth 
 that els must perish here . 
 pompey . to you all three , 
 the senat alon of thi great world , 
 chief factor for the god : i do not know 
 wherefor my father should reveng want , 
 have a son and friend , sinc juliu caesar , 
 who at philippi the good brutu ghost , 
 there saw you labour for him . what was't 
 that mov 'd pale cassiu to conspir ? and what 
 made the all-honour 'd honest roman , brutu , 
 with the arm 'd rest , courtier of beauteou freedom , 
 to drench the capitol , but that they would 
 have one man but a man ? and that is it 
 hath made me rig my navi , at whose burden 
 the anger 'd ocean foam ; with which i meant 
 to scourg th ' ingratitud that despit rome 
 cast on my nobl father . 
 caesar . take your time . 
 antoni . thou canst not fear us , pompey , with thi sail ; 
 we 'll speak with thee at sea ; at land thou know'st 
 how much we do o'er-count thee . 
 pompey . at land , inde , 
 thou dost o'er-count me of my father 's hous . 
 but sinc the cuckoo build not for himself , 
 remain i n't as thou mayst . 
 lepidu . be plea 'd to tell us- 
 for thi is from the present- how you take 
 the offer we have sent you . 
 caesar . there 's the point . 
 antoni . which do not be entreat to , but weigh 
 what it is worth embrac 'd . 
 caesar . and what may follow , 
 to tri a larger fortun . 
 pompey . you have made me offer 
 of sicili , sardinia ; and i must 
 rid all the sea of pirat ; then to send 
 measur of wheat to rome ; thi 'greed upon , 
 to part with unhack 'd edg and bear back 
 our targ undint . 
 all . that 's our offer . 
 pompey . know , then , 
 i came befor you here a man prepar 'd 
 to take thi offer ; but mark antoni 
 put me to some impati . though i lose 
 the prais of it by tell , you must know , 
 when caesar and your brother were at blow , 
 your mother came to sicili and did find 
 her welcom friendli . 
 antoni . i have heard it , pompey , 
 and am well studi for a liber thank 
 which i do owe you . 
 pompey . let me have your hand . 
 i did not think , sir , to have met you here . 
 antoni . the bed i ' th ' east are soft ; and thank to you , 
 that call 'd me timeli than my purpos hither ; 
 for i have gain by't . 
 caesar . sinc i saw you last 
 there is a chang upon you . 
 pompey . well , i know not 
 what count harsh fortun cast upon my face ; 
 but in my bosom shall she never come 
 to make my heart her vassal . 
 lepidu . well met here . 
 pompey . i hope so , lepidu . thu we are agre . 
 i crave our composit may be written , 
 and seal 'd between us . 
 caesar . that 's the next to do . 
 pompey . we 'll feast each other ere we part , and let 's 
 draw lot who shall begin . 
 antoni . that will i , pompey . 
 pompey . no , antoni , take the lot ; 
 but , first or last , your fine egyptian cookeri 
 shall have the fame . i have heard that juliu caesar 
 grew fat with feast there . 
 antoni . you have heard much . 
 pompey . i have fair mean , sir . 
 antoni . and fair word to them . 
 pompey . then so much have i heard ; 
 and i have heard apollodoru carried- 
 enobarbu . no more of that ! he did so . 
 pompey . what , i pray you ? 
 enobarbu . a certain queen to caesar in a mattress . 
 pompey . i know thee now . how far'st thou , soldier ? 
 enobarbu . well ; 
 and well am like to do , for i perceiv 
 four feast are toward . 
 pompey . let me shake thi hand . 
 i never hate thee ; i have seen thee fight , 
 when i have envi thi behaviour . 
 enobarbu . sir , 
 i never lov 'd you much ; but i ha ' prai 'd ye 
 when you have well deserv 'd ten time as much 
 as i have said you did . 
 pompey . enjoy thi plain ; 
 it noth ill becom thee . 
 aboard my galley i invit you all . 
 will you lead , lord ? 
 all . show 's the way , sir . 
 pompey . come . exeunt all but enobarbu and mena 
 mena . [ asid ] thi father , pompey , would ne'er have made thi 
 treaty.- you and i have known , sir . 
 enobarbu . at sea , i think . 
 mena . we have , sir . 
 enobarbu . you have done well by water . 
 mena . and you by land . 
 enobarbu . i will prais ani man that will prais me ; though it 
 can not be deni what i have done by land . 
 mena . nor what i have done by water . 
 enobarbu . ye , someth you can deni for your own safeti : you 
 have been a great thief by sea . 
 mena . and you by land . 
 enobarbu . there i deni my land servic . but give me your hand , 
 mena ; if our eye had author , here they might take two 
 thiev kiss . 
 mena . all men 's face are true , whatsome' their hand are . 
 enobarbu . but there is never a fair woman ha a true face . 
 mena . no slander : they steal heart . 
 enobarbu . we came hither to fight with you . 
 mena . for my part , i am sorri it is turn 'd to a drink . 
 pompey doth thi day laugh away hi fortun . 
 enobarbu . if he do , sure he can not weep't back again . 
 mena . y'have said , sir . we look 'd not for mark antoni here . pray 
 you , is he marri to cleopatra ? 
 enobarbu . caesar ' sister is call 'd octavia . 
 mena . true , sir ; she wa the wife of caiu marcellu . 
 enobarbu . but she is now the wife of marcu antoniu . 
 mena . pray ye , sir ? 
 enobarbu . 't is true . 
 mena . then is caesar and he for ever knit togeth . 
 enobarbu . if i were bound to divin of thi uniti , i would not 
 prophesi so . 
 mena . i think the polici of that purpos made more in the marriag 
 than the love of the parti . 
 enobarbu . i think so too . but you shall find the band that seem 
 to tie their friendship togeth will be the veri strangler of 
 their amiti : octavia is of a holi , cold , and still convers . 
 mena . who would not have hi wife so ? 
 enobarbu . not he that himself is not so ; which is mark antoni . he 
 will to hi egyptian dish again ; then shall the sigh of octavia 
 blow the fire up in caesar , and , as i said befor , that which is 
 the strength of their amiti shall prove the immedi author of 
 their varianc . antoni will use hi affect where it is ; he 
 marri but hi occas here . 
 mena . and thu it may be . come , sir , will you aboard ? i have a 
 health for you . 
 enobarbu . i shall take it , sir . we have us 'd our throat in egypt . 
 mena . come , let 's away . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene vii . 
 on board pompey 's galley , off misenum 
 
 music play . enter two or three servant with a banquet 
 
 first servant . here they 'll be , man . some o ' their plant are 
 ill-root alreadi ; the least wind i ' th ' world will blow them 
 down . 
 second servant . lepidu is high-colour 'd . 
 first servant . they have made him drink alms-drink . 
 second servant . as they pinch one anoth by the disposit , he 
 cri out 'no more ! ' ; reconcil them to hi entreati and himself 
 to th ' drink . 
 first servant . but it rais the greater war between him and hi 
 discret . 
 second servant . whi , thi it is to have a name in great men 's 
 fellowship . i had as lief have a reed that will do me no servic 
 as a partizan i could not heav . 
 first servant . to be call 'd into a huge sphere , and not to be seen 
 to move i n't , are the hole where eye should be , which piti 
 disast the cheek . 
 
 a sennet sound . enter caesar , antoni , lepidu , 
 pompey , agrippa , maecena , enobarbu , mena , 
 with other captain 
 
 antoni . [ to caesar ] thu do they , sir : they take the flow o ' th ' 
 nile 
 by certain scale i ' th ' pyramid ; they know 
 by th ' height , the low , or the mean , if dearth 
 or foison follow . the higher nilu swell 
 the more it promis ; as it ebb , the seedsman 
 upon the slime and ooz scatter hi grain , 
 and shortli come to harvest . 
 lepidu . y'have strang serpent there . 
 antoni . ay , lepidu . 
 lepidu . your serpent of egypt is bred now of your mud by the 
 oper of your sun ; so is your crocodil . 
 antoni . they are so . 
 pompey . sit- and some wine ! a health to lepidu ! 
 lepidu . i am not so well as i should be , but i 'll ne'er out . 
 enobarbu . not till you have slept . i fear me you 'll be in till 
 then . 
 lepidu . nay , certainli , i have heard the ptolemi ' pyramis are 
 veri goodli thing . without contradict i have heard that . 
 mena . [ asid to pompey ] pompey , a word . 
 pompey . [ asid to mena ] say in mine ear ; what is't ? 
 mena . [ asid to pompey ] forsak thi seat , i do beseech thee , 
 captain , 
 and hear me speak a word . 
 pompey . [ whisper in 's ear ] forbear me till anon- 
 thi wine for lepidu ! 
 lepidu . what manner o ' thing is your crocodil ? 
 antoni . it is shap 'd , sir , like itself , and it is as broad as it 
 hath breadth ; it is just so high as it is , and move with it own 
 organ . it live by that which nourisheth it , and the element 
 onc out of it , it transmigr . 
 lepidu . what colour is it of ? 
 antoni . of it own colour too . 
 lepidu . 't is a strang serpent . 
 antoni . 't is so . and the tear of it are wet . 
 caesar . will thi descript satisfi him ? 
 antoni . with the health that pompey give him , els he is a veri 
 epicur . 
 pompey . [ asid to mena ] go , hang , sir , hang ! tell me of that ! 
 away ! 
 do as i bid you.- where 's thi cup i call 'd for ? 
 mena . [ asid to pompey ] if for the sake of merit thou wilt hear 
 me , 
 rise from thi stool . 
 pompey . [ asid to mena ] i think th'art mad . [ rise and walk 
 asid ] the matter ? 
 mena . i have ever held my cap off to thi fortun . 
 pompey . thou hast serv 'd me with much faith . what 's els to say ? - 
 be jolli , lord . 
 antoni . these quicksand , lepidu , 
 keep off them , for you sink . 
 mena . wilt thou be lord of all the world ? 
 pompey . what say'st thou ? 
 mena . wilt thou be lord of the whole world ? that 's twice . 
 pompey . how should that be ? 
 mena . but entertain it , 
 and though you think me poor , i am the man 
 will give thee all the world . 
 pompey . hast thou drunk well ? 
 mena . no , pompey , i have kept me from the cup . 
 thou art , if thou dar'st be , the earthli jove ; 
 whate' the ocean pale or sky inclip 
 is thine , if thou wilt ha't . 
 pompey . show me which way . 
 mena . these three world-shar , these competitor , 
 are in thi vessel . let me cut the cabl ; 
 and when we are put off , fall to their throat . 
 all there is thine . 
 pompey . ah , thi thou shouldst have done , 
 and not have spoke o n't . in me 't is villaini : 
 in thee't had been good servic . thou must know 
 't is not my profit that doe lead mine honour : 
 mine honour , it . repent that e'er thi tongu 
 hath so betray 'd thine act . be done unknown , 
 i should have found it afterward well done , 
 but must condemn it now . desist , and drink . 
 mena . [ asid ] for thi , 
 i 'll never follow thi pall 'd fortun more . 
 who seek , and will not take when onc 't is offer 'd , 
 shall never find it more . 
 pompey . thi health to lepidu ! 
 antoni . bear him ashor . i 'll pledg it for him , pompey . 
 enobarbu . here 's to thee , mena ! 
 mena . enobarbu , welcom ! 
 pompey . fill till the cup be hid . 
 enobarbu . there 's a strong fellow , mena . 
 [ point to the servant who carri off lepidu ] 
 mena . whi ? 
 enobarbu . ' a bear the third part of the world , man ; see'st not ? 
 mena . the third part , then , is drunk . would it were all , 
 that it might go on wheel ! 
 enobarbu . drink thou ; increas the reel . 
 mena . come . 
 pompey . thi is not yet an alexandrian feast . 
 antoni . it ripen toward it . strike the vessel , ho ! 
 here 's to caesar ! 
 caesar . i could well forbear't . 
 it 's monstrou labour when i wash my brain 
 and it grow fouler . 
 antoni . be a child o ' th ' time . 
 caesar . possess it , i 'll make answer . 
 but i had rather fast from all four day 
 than drink so much in one . 
 enobarbu . [ to antoni ] ha , my brave emperor ! 
 shall we danc now the egyptian bacchan 
 and celebr our drink ? 
 pompey . let 's ha't , good soldier . 
 antoni . come , let 's all take hand , 
 till that the conquer wine hath steep 'd our sens 
 in soft and delic leth . 
 enobarbu . all take hand . 
 make batteri to our ear with the loud music , 
 the while i 'll place you ; then the boy shall sing ; 
 the hold everi man shall bear as loud 
 as hi strong side can volley . 
 [ music play . enobarbu place them hand in hand ] 
 
 the song 
 come , thou monarch of the vine , 
 plumpi bacchu with pink eyn ! 
 in thi fat our care be drown 'd , 
 with thi grape our hair be crown 'd . 
 cup us till the world go round , 
 cup us till the world go round ! 
 
 caesar . what would you more ? pompey , good night . good brother , 
 let me request you off ; our graver busi 
 frown at thi leviti . gentl lord , let 's part ; 
 you see we have burnt our cheek . strong enobarb 
 is weaker than the wine , and mine own tongu 
 split what it speak . the wild disguis hath almost 
 antick 'd us all . what need more word ? good night . 
 good antoni , your hand . 
 pompey . i 'll tri you on the shore . 
 antoni . and shall , sir . give 's your hand . 
 pompey . o antoni , 
 you have my father 's house- but what ? we are friend . 
 come , down into the boat . 
 enobarbu . take heed you fall not . 
 exeunt all but enobarbu and mena 
 mena , i 'll not on shore . 
 mena . no , to my cabin . 
 these drum ! these trumpet , flute ! what ! 
 let neptun hear we bid a loud farewel 
 to these great fellow . sound and be hang 'd , sound out ! 
 [ sound a flourish , with drum ] 
 enobarbu . hoo ! say ' a . there 's my cap . 
 mena . hoo ! nobl captain , come . exeunt 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 act iii . scene i . 
 a plain in syria 
 
 enter ventidiu , as it were in triumph , with siliu 
 and other roman , offic and soldier ; the dead bodi 
 of pacoru born befor him 
 
 ventidiu . now , dart parthia , art thou struck , and now 
 plea 'd fortun doe of marcu crassu ' death 
 make me reveng . bear the king 's son 's bodi 
 befor our armi . thi pacoru , orod , 
 pay thi for marcu crassu . 
 siliu . nobl ventidiu , 
 whilst yet with parthian blood thi sword is warm 
 the fugit parthian follow ; spur through media , 
 mesopotamia , and the shelter whither 
 the rout fli . so thi grand captain , antoni , 
 shall set thee on triumphant chariot and 
 put garland on thi head . 
 ventidiu . o siliu , siliu , 
 i have done enough . a lower place , note well , 
 may make too great an act ; for learn thi , siliu : 
 better to leav undon than by our deed 
 acquir too high a fame when him we serv 's away . 
 caesar and antoni have ever won 
 more in their offic , than person . sossiu , 
 one of my place in syria , hi lieuten , 
 for quick accumul of renown , 
 which he achiev 'd by th ' minut , lost hi favour . 
 who doe i ' th ' war more than hi captain can 
 becom hi captain 's captain ; and ambit , 
 the soldier 's virtu , rather make choic of loss 
 than gain which darken him . 
 i could do more to do antoniu good , 
 but 'twould offend him ; and in hi offenc 
 should my perform perish . 
 siliu . thou hast , ventidiu , that 
 without the which a soldier and hi sword 
 grant scarc distinct . thou wilt write to antoni ? 
 ventidiu . i 'll humbl signifi what in hi name , 
 that magic word of war , we have effect ; 
 how , with hi banner , and hi well-paid rank , 
 the ne'er-yet-beaten hors of parthia 
 we have jade out o ' th ' field . 
 siliu . where is he now ? 
 ventidiu . he purposeth to athen ; whither , with what hast 
 the weight we must convey with 's will permit , 
 we shall appear befor him.- on , there ; pass along . 
 exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene ii . rome . caesar 's hous 
 
 enter agrippa at one door , enobarbu at anoth 
 
 agrippa . what , are the brother part ? 
 enobarbu . they have dispatch 'd with pompey ; he is gone ; 
 the other three are seal . octavia weep 
 to part from rome ; caesar is sad ; and lepidu , 
 sinc pompey 's feast , as mena say , is troubl 
 with the green sick . 
 agrippa . 't is a nobl lepidu . 
 enobarbu . a veri fine one . o , how he love caesar ! 
 agrippa . nay , but how dearli he ador mark antoni ! 
 enobarbu . caesar ? whi he 's the jupit of men . 
 agrippa . what 's antoni ? the god of jupit . 
 enobarbu . spake you of caesar ? how ! the nonpareil ! 
 agrippa . o , antoni ! o thou arabian bird ! 
 enobarbu . would you prais caesar , say 'caesar'- go no further . 
 agrippa . inde , he pli them both with excel prais . 
 enobarbu . but he love caesar best . yet he love antoni . 
 hoo ! heart , tongu , figur , scribe , bard , poet , can not 
 think , speak , cast , write , sing , number- hoo ! - 
 hi love to antoni . but as for caesar , 
 kneel down , kneel down , and wonder . 
 agrippa . both he love . 
 enobarbu . they are hi shard , and he their beetl . [ trumpet 
 within ] so- 
 thi is to hors . adieu , nobl agrippa . 
 agrippa . good fortun , worthi soldier , and farewel . 
 
 enter caesar , antoni , lepidu , and octavia 
 
 antoni . no further , sir . 
 caesar . you take from me a great part of myself ; 
 use me well i n't . sister , prove such a wife 
 as my thought make thee , and as my farthest band 
 shall pass on thi approof . most nobl antoni , 
 let not the piec of virtu which is set 
 betwixt us as the cement of our love 
 to keep it build be the ram to batter 
 the fortress of it ; for better might we 
 have lov 'd without thi mean , if on both part 
 thi be not cherish 'd . 
 antoni . make me not offend 
 in your distrust . 
 caesar . i have said . 
 antoni . you shall not find , 
 though you be therein curiou , the least caus 
 for what you seem to fear . so the god keep you , 
 and make the heart of roman serv your end ! 
 we will here part . 
 caesar . farewel , my dearest sister , fare thee well . 
 the element be kind to thee and make 
 thi spirit all of comfort ! fare thee well . 
 octavia . my nobl brother ! 
 antoni . the april 's in her eye . it is love 's spring , 
 and these the shower to bring it on . be cheer . 
 octavia . sir , look well to my husband 's hous ; and- 
 caesar . what , octavia ? 
 octavia . i 'll tell you in your ear . 
 antoni . her tongu will not obey her heart , nor can 
 her heart inform her tongue- the swan 's down feather , 
 that stand upon the swell at the full of tide , 
 and neither way inclin . 
 enobarbu . [ asid to agrippa ] will caesar weep ? 
 agrippa . [ asid to enobarbu ] he ha a cloud in 's face . 
 enobarbu . [ asid to agrippa ] he were the wors for that , were he a 
 hors ; 
 so is he , be a man . 
 agrippa . [ asid to enobarbu ] whi , enobarbu , 
 when antoni found juliu caesar dead , 
 he cri almost to roar ; and he wept 
 when at philippi he found brutu slain . 
 enobarbu . [ asid to agrippa ] that year , inde , he wa troubl 
 with a rheum ; 
 what willingli he did confound he wail 'd , 
 believe't- till i weep too . 
 caesar . no , sweet octavia , 
 you shall hear from me still ; the time shall not 
 out-go my think on you . 
 antoni . come , sir , come ; 
 i 'll wrestl with you in my strength of love . 
 look , here i have you ; thu i let you go , 
 and give you to the god . 
 caesar . adieu ; be happi ! 
 lepidu . let all the number of the star give light 
 to thi fair way ! 
 caesar . farewel , farewel ! [ kiss octavia ] 
 antoni . farewel ! trumpet sound . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene iii . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter cleopatra , charmian , ira , and alexa 
 
 cleopatra . where is the fellow ? 
 alexa . half afeard to come . 
 cleopatra . go to , go to . 
 
 enter the messeng as befor 
 
 come hither , sir . 
 alexa . good majesti , 
 herod of jewri dare not look upon you 
 but when you are well plea 'd . 
 cleopatra . that herod 's head 
 i 'll have . but how , when antoni is gone , 
 through whom i might command it ? come thou near . 
 messeng . most graciou majesti ! 
 cleopatra . didst thou behold octavia ? 
 messeng . ay , dread queen . 
 cleopatra . where ? 
 messeng . madam , in rome 
 i look 'd her in the face , and saw her led 
 between her brother and mark antoni . 
 cleopatra . is she as tall as me ? 
 messeng . she is not , madam . 
 cleopatra . didst hear her speak ? is she shrill-tongu 'd or low ? 
 messeng . madam , i heard her speak : she is low-voic 'd . 
 cleopatra . that 's not so good . he can not like her long . 
 charmian . like her ? o isi ! 't is imposs . 
 cleopatra . i think so , charmian . dull of tongu and dwarfish ! 
 what majesti is in her gait ? rememb , 
 if e'er thou look'dst on majesti . 
 messeng . she creep . 
 her motion and her station are as one ; 
 she show a bodi rather than a life , 
 a statu than a breather . 
 cleopatra . is thi certain ? 
 messeng . or i have no observ . 
 charmian . three in egypt 
 can not make better note . 
 cleopatra . he 's veri know ; 
 i do perceive't . there 's noth in her yet . 
 the fellow ha good judgment . 
 charmian . excel . 
 cleopatra . guess at her year , i prithe . 
 messeng . madam , 
 she wa a widow . 
 cleopatra . widow ? charmian , hark ! 
 messeng . and i do think she 's thirti . 
 cleopatra . bear'st thou her face in mind ? is't long or round ? 
 messeng . round even to faulti . 
 cleopatra . for the most part , too , they are foolish that are so . 
 her hair , what colour ? 
 messeng . brown , madam ; and her forehead 
 as low as she would wish it . 
 cleopatra . there 's gold for thee . 
 thou must not take my former sharp ill. 
 i will employ thee back again ; i find thee 
 most fit for busi . go make thee readi ; 
 our letter are prepar 'd . exeunt messeng 
 charmian . a proper man . 
 cleopatra . inde , he is so . i repent me much 
 that so i harri him . whi , methink , by him , 
 thi creatur 's no such thing . 
 charmian . noth , madam . 
 cleopatra . the man hath seen some majesti , and should know . 
 charmian . hath he seen majesti ? isi els defend , 
 and serv you so long ! 
 cleopatra . i have one thing more to ask him yet , good charmian . 
 but 't is no matter ; thou shalt bring him to me 
 where i will write . all may be well enough . 
 charmian . i warrant you , madam . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene iv . 
 athen . antoni 's hous 
 
 enter antoni and octavia 
 
 antoni . nay , nay , octavia , not onli that- 
 that were excus , that and thousand more 
 of semblabl import- but he hath wag 'd 
 new war 'gainst pompey ; made hi will , and read it 
 to public ear ; 
 spoke scandi of me ; when perforc he could not 
 but pay me term of honour , cold and sickli 
 he vent them , most narrow measur lent me ; 
 when the best hint wa given him , he not took't , 
 or did it from hi teeth . 
 octavia . o my good lord , 
 believ not all ; or if you must believ , 
 stomach not all . a more unhappi ladi , 
 if thi divis chanc , ne'er stood between , 
 pray for both part . 
 the good god will mock me present 
 when i shall pray ' o , bless my lord and husband ! ' 
 undo that prayer by cri out as loud 
 ' o , bless my brother ! ' husband win , win brother , 
 pray , and destroy the prayer ; no mid-way 
 'twixt these extrem at all . 
 antoni . gentl octavia , 
 let your best love draw to that point which seek 
 best to preserv it . if i lose mine honour , 
 i lose myself ; better i were not your 
 than your so branchless . but , as you request , 
 yourself shall go between 's . the meantim , ladi , 
 i 'll rais the prepar of a war 
 shall stain your brother . make your soonest hast ; 
 so your desir are your . 
 octavia . thank to my lord . 
 the jove of power make me , most weak , most weak , 
 your reconcil ! war 'twixt you twain would be 
 as if the world should cleav , and that slain men 
 should solder up the rift . 
 antoni . when it appear to you where thi begin , 
 turn your displeasur that way , for our fault 
 can never be so equal that your love 
 can equal move with them . provid your go ; 
 choos your own compani , and command what cost 
 your heart ha mind to . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene v. 
 athen . antoni 's hous 
 
 enter enobarbu and ero , meet 
 
 enobarbu . how now , friend ero ! 
 ero . there 's strang news come , sir . 
 enobarbu . what , man ? 
 ero . caesar and lepidu have made war upon pompey . 
 enobarbu . thi is old . what is the success ? 
 ero . caesar , have made use of him in the war 'gainst pompey , 
 present deni him rival , would not let him partak in the 
 glori of the action ; and not rest here , accus him of letter 
 he had formerli wrote to pompey ; upon hi own appeal , seiz him . 
 so the poor third is up , till death enlarg hi confin . 
 enobarbu . then , world , thou hast a pair of chaps- no more ; 
 and throw between them all the food thou hast , 
 they 'll grind the one the other . where 's antoni ? 
 ero . he 's walk in the garden- thu , and spurn 
 the rush that lie befor him ; cri 'fool lepidu ! ' 
 and threat the throat of that hi offic 
 that murd'r pompey . 
 enobarbu . our great navi 's rigg 'd . 
 ero . for itali and caesar . more , domitiu : 
 my lord desir you present ; my news 
 i might have told hereaft . 
 enobarbu . 'twill be naught ; 
 but let it be . bring me to antoni . 
 ero . come , sir . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene vi . 
 rome . caesar 's hous 
 
 enter caesar , agrippa , and maecena 
 
 caesar . contemn rome , he ha done all thi and more 
 in alexandria . here 's the manner of't : 
 i ' th ' market-plac , on a tribun silver 'd , 
 cleopatra and himself in chair of gold 
 were publicli enthron 'd ; at the feet sat 
 caesarion , whom they call my father 's son , 
 and all the unlaw issu that their lust 
 sinc then hath made between them . unto her 
 he gave the stablish of egypt ; made her 
 of lower syria , cypru , lydia , 
 absolut queen . 
 maecena . thi in the public eye ? 
 caesar . i ' th ' common show-plac , where they exercis . 
 hi son he there proclaim 'd the king of king : 
 great media , parthia , and armenia , 
 he gave to alexand ; to ptolemi he assign 'd 
 syria , cilicia , and phoenicia . she 
 in th ' habili of the goddess isi 
 that day appear 'd ; and oft befor gave audienc , 
 as 't is report , so . 
 maecena . let rome be thu 
 inform 'd . 
 agrippa . who , queasi with hi insol 
 alreadi , will their good thought call from him . 
 caesar . the peopl know it , and have now receiv 'd 
 hi accus . 
 agrippa . who doe he accus ? 
 caesar . caesar ; and that , have in sicili 
 sextu pompeiu spoil 'd , we had not rate him 
 hi part o ' th ' isl . then doe he say he lent me 
 some ship , unrestor 'd . lastli , he fret 
 that lepidu of the triumvir 
 should be depo 'd ; and , be , that we detain 
 all hi revenu . 
 agrippa . sir , thi should be answer 'd . 
 caesar . 't is done alreadi , and messeng gone . 
 i have told him lepidu wa grown too cruel , 
 that he hi high author abu 'd , 
 and did deserv hi chang . for what i have conquer 'd 
 i grant him part ; but then , in hi armenia 
 and other of hi conquer 'd kingdom , 
 demand the like . 
 maecena . he 'll never yield to that . 
 caesar . nor must not then be yield to in thi . 
 
 enter octavia , with her train 
 
 octavia . hail , caesar , and my lord ! hail , most dear caesar ! 
 caesar . that ever i should call thee cast-away ! 
 octavia . you have not call 'd me so , nor have you caus . 
 caesar . whi have you stol'n upon us thu ? you come not 
 like caesar 's sister . the wife of antoni 
 should have an armi for an usher , and 
 the neigh of hors to tell of her approach 
 long ere she did appear . the tree by th ' way 
 should have born men , and expect faint , 
 long for what it had not . nay , the dust 
 should have ascend to the roof of heaven , 
 rai 'd by your popul troop . but you are come 
 a market-maid to rome , and have prevent 
 the ostent of our love , which left unshown 
 is often left unlov 'd . we should have met you 
 by sea and land , suppli everi stage 
 with an augment greet . 
 octavia . good my lord , 
 to come thu wa i not constrain 'd , but did it 
 on my free will . my lord , mark antoni , 
 hear that you prepar 'd for war , acquaint 
 my griev ear withal ; whereon i begg 'd 
 hi pardon for return . 
 caesar . which soon he grant , 
 be an obstruct 'tween hi lust and him . 
 octavia . do not say so , my lord . 
 caesar . i have eye upon him , 
 and hi affair come to me on the wind . 
 where is he now ? 
 octavia . my lord , in athen . 
 caesar . no , my most wrong sister : cleopatra 
 hath nod him to her . he hath given hi empir 
 up to a whore , who now are levi 
 the king o ' th ' earth for war . he hath assembl 
 bocchu , the king of libya ; archelau 
 of cappadocia ; philadelpho , king 
 of paphlagonia ; the thracian king , adalla ; 
 king manchu of arabia ; king of pont ; 
 herod of jewri ; mithrid , king 
 of comagen ; polemon and amynta , 
 the king of mede and lycaonia , with 
 more larger list of sceptr . 
 octavia . ay me most wretch , 
 that have my heart part betwixt two friend , 
 that doe afflict each other ! 
 caesar . welcom hither . 
 your letter did withhold our break forth , 
 till we perceiv 'd both how you were wrong led 
 and we in neglig danger . cheer your heart ; 
 be you not troubl with the time , which drive 
 o'er your content these strong necess , 
 but let determin 'd thing to destini 
 hold unbewail 'd their way . welcom to rome ; 
 noth more dear to me . you are abu 'd 
 beyond the mark of thought , and the high god , 
 to do you justic , make their minist 
 of us and those that love you . best of comfort , 
 and ever welcom to us . 
 agrippa . welcom , ladi . 
 maecena . welcom , dear madam . 
 each heart in rome doe love and piti you ; 
 onli th ' adulter antoni , most larg 
 in hi abomin , turn you off , 
 and give hi potent regiment to a trull 
 that nois it against us . 
 octavia . is it so , sir ? 
 caesar . most certain . sister , welcom . pray you 
 be ever known to patienc . my dear'st sister ! exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene vii . 
 antoni 's camp near actium 
 
 enter cleopatra and enobarbu 
 
 cleopatra . i will be even with thee , doubt it not . 
 enobarbu . but whi , whi , 
 cleopatra . thou hast forspok my be in these war , 
 and say'st it is not fit . 
 enobarbu . well , is it , is it ? 
 cleopatra . is't not denounc 'd against us ? whi should not we 
 be there in person ? 
 enobarbu . [ asid ] well , i could repli : 
 if we should serv with hors and mare togeth 
 the hors were mere lost ; the mare would bear 
 a soldier and hi hors . 
 cleopatra . what is't you say ? 
 enobarbu . your presenc need must puzzl antoni ; 
 take from hi heart , take from hi brain , from 's time , 
 what should not then be spar 'd . he is alreadi 
 traduc 'd for leviti ; and 't is said in rome 
 that photinu an eunuch and your maid 
 manag thi war . 
 cleopatra . sink rome , and their tongu rot 
 that speak against us ! a charg we bear i ' th ' war , 
 and , as the presid of my kingdom , will 
 appear there for a man . speak not against it ; 
 i will not stay behind . 
 
 enter antoni and canidiu 
 
 enobarbu . nay , i have done . 
 here come the emperor . 
 antoni . is it not strang , canidiu , 
 that from tarentum and brundusium 
 he could so quickli cut the ionian sea , 
 and take in toryn ? - you have heard o n't , sweet ? 
 cleopatra . celer is never more admir 'd 
 than by the neglig . 
 antoni . a good rebuk , 
 which might have well becom 'd the best of men 
 to taunt at slack . canidiu , we 
 will fight with him by sea . 
 cleopatra . by sea ! what els ? 
 canidiu . whi will my lord do so ? 
 antoni . for that he dare us to't . 
 enobarbu . so hath my lord dar 'd him to singl fight . 
 canidiu . ay , and to wage thi battl at pharsalia , 
 where caesar fought with pompey . but these offer , 
 which serv not for hi vantag , he shake off ; 
 and so should you . 
 enobarbu . your ship are not well mann 'd ; 
 your marin are mulet , reaper , peopl 
 ingross 'd by swift impress . in caesar 's fleet 
 are those that often have 'gainst pompey fought ; 
 their ship are yare ; your heavi . no disgrac 
 shall fall you for refus him at sea , 
 be prepar 'd for land . 
 antoni . by sea , by sea . 
 enobarbu . most worthi sir , you therein throw away 
 the absolut soldiership you have by land ; 
 distract your armi , which doth most consist 
 of war-mark 'd footmen ; leav unexecut 
 your own renown knowledg ; quit forgo 
 the way which promis assur ; and 
 give up yourself mere to chanc and hazard 
 from firm secur . 
 antoni . i 'll fight at sea . 
 cleopatra . i have sixti sail , caesar none better . 
 antoni . our overplu of ship will we burn , 
 and , with the rest full-mann 'd , from th ' head of actium 
 beat th ' approach caesar . but if we fail , 
 we then can do't at land . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 thi busi ? 
 messeng . the news is true , my lord : he is descri ; 
 caesar ha taken toryn . 
 antoni . can he be there in person ? 't is impossible- 
 strang that hi power should be . canidiu , 
 our nineteen legion thou shalt hold by land , 
 and our twelv thousand hors . we 'll to our ship . 
 away , my theti ! 
 
 enter a soldier 
 
 how now , worthi soldier ? 
 soldier . o nobl emperor , do not fight by sea ; 
 trust not to rotten plank . do you misdoubt 
 thi sword and these my wound ? let th ' egyptian 
 and the phoenician go a-duck ; we 
 have us 'd to conquer stand on the earth 
 and fight foot to foot . 
 antoni . well , well- away . 
 exeunt antoni , cleopatra , and enobarbu 
 soldier . by hercul , i think i am i ' th ' right . 
 canidiu . soldier , thou art ; but hi whole action grow 
 not in the power o n't . so our leader 's led , 
 and we are women 's men . 
 soldier . you keep by land 
 the legion and the hors whole , do you not ? 
 canidiu . marcu octaviu , marcu justeiu , 
 publicola , and caeliu are for sea ; 
 but we keep whole by land . thi speed of caesar 's 
 carri beyond belief . 
 soldier . while he wa yet in rome , 
 hi power went out in such distract as 
 beguil 'd all spi . 
 canidiu . who 's hi lieuten , hear you ? 
 soldier . they say one tauru . 
 canidiu . well i know the man . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . the emperor call canidiu . 
 canidiu . with news the time 's with labour and throe forth 
 each minut some . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene viii . 
 a plain near actium 
 
 enter caesar , with hi armi , march 
 
 caesar . tauru ! 
 tauru . my lord ? 
 caesar . strike not by land ; keep whole ; provok not battl 
 till we have done at sea . do not exceed 
 the prescript of thi scroll . our fortun lie 
 upon thi jump . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene ix . 
 anoth part of the plain 
 
 enter antoni and enobarbu 
 
 antoni . set we our squadron on yon side o ' th ' hill , 
 in eye of caesar 's battl ; from which place 
 we may the number of the ship behold , 
 and so proceed accordingli . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene x . 
 anoth part of the plain 
 
 canidiu marcheth with hi land armi one way 
 over the stage , and tauru , the lieuten of 
 caesar , the other way . after their go in is heard 
 the nois of a sea-fight 
 
 alarum . enter enobarbu 
 
 enobarbu . naught , naught , all naught ! i can behold no longer . 
 th ' antoniad , the egyptian admir , 
 with all their sixti , fli and turn the rudder . 
 to see't mine eye are blast . 
 
 enter scaru 
 
 scaru . god and goddess , 
 all the whole synod of them ! 
 enobarbu . what 's thi passion ? 
 scaru . the greater cantl of the world is lost 
 with veri ignor ; we have kiss 'd away 
 kingdom and provinc . 
 enobarbu . how appear the fight ? 
 scaru . on our side like the token 'd pestil , 
 where death is sure . yon ribaudr nag of egypt- 
 whom leprosi o'ertak ! - i ' th ' midst o ' th ' fight , 
 when vantag like a pair of twin appear 'd , 
 both as the same , or rather our the elder- 
 the brees upon her , like a cow in june- 
 hoist sail and fli . 
 enobarbu . that i beheld ; 
 mine eye did sicken at the sight and could not 
 endur a further view . 
 scaru . she onc be loof 'd , 
 the nobl ruin of her magic , antoni , 
 clap on hi sea-w , and , like a dote mallard , 
 leav the fight in height , fli after her . 
 i never saw an action of such shame ; 
 experi , manhood , honour , ne'er befor 
 did violat so itself . 
 enobarbu . alack , alack ! 
 
 enter canidiu 
 
 canidiu . our fortun on the sea is out of breath , 
 and sink most lament . had our gener 
 been what he knew himself , it had gone well . 
 o , he ha given exampl for our flight 
 most grossli by hi own ! 
 enobarbu . ay , are you thereabout ? 
 whi then , good night inde . 
 canidiu . toward peloponnesu are they fled . 
 scaru . 't is easi to't ; and there i will attend 
 what further come . 
 canidiu . to caesar will i render 
 my legion and my hors ; six king alreadi 
 show me the way of yield . 
 enobarbu . i 'll yet follow 
 the wound chanc of antoni , though my reason 
 sit in the wind against me . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xi . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter antoni with attend 
 
 antoni . hark ! the land bid me tread no more upo n't ; 
 it is asham 'd to bear me . friend , come hither . 
 i am so late in the world that i 
 have lost my way for ever . i have a ship 
 laden with gold ; take that ; divid it . fli , 
 and make your peac with caesar . 
 all . fli ? not we ! 
 antoni . i have fled myself , and have instruct coward 
 to run and show their shoulder . friend , be gone ; 
 i have myself resolv 'd upon a cours 
 which ha no need of you ; be gone . 
 my treasur 's in the harbour , take it . o , 
 i follow 'd that i blush to look upon . 
 my veri hair do mutini ; for the white 
 reprov the brown for rash , and they them 
 for fear and dote . friend , be gone ; you shall 
 have letter from me to some friend that will 
 sweep your way for you . pray you look not sad , 
 nor make repli of loath ; take the hint 
 which my despair proclaim . let that be left 
 which leav itself . to the sea-sid straight way . 
 i will possess you of that ship and treasur . 
 leav me , i pray , a littl ; pray you now ; 
 nay , do so , for inde i have lost command ; 
 therefor i pray you . i 'll see you by and by . [ sit down ] 
 
 enter cleopatra , led by charmian and ira , 
 ero follow 
 
 ero . nay , gentl madam , to him ! comfort him . 
 ira . do , most dear queen . 
 charmian . do ? whi , what els ? 
 cleopatra . let me sit down . o juno ! 
 antoni . no , no , no , no , no . 
 ero . see you here , sir ? 
 antoni . o , fie , fie , fie ! 
 charmian . madam ! 
 ira . madam , o good empress ! 
 ero . sir , sir ! 
 antoni . ye , my lord , ye . he at philippi kept 
 hi sword e'en like a dancer , while i struck 
 the lean and wrinkl cassiu ; and 't wa i 
 that the mad brutu end ; he alon 
 dealt on lieutenantri , and no practic had 
 in the brave squar of war . yet now- no matter . 
 cleopatra . ah , stand by ! 
 ero . the queen , my lord , the queen ! 
 ira . go to him , madam , speak to him . 
 he is unqual with veri shame . 
 cleopatra . well then , sustain me . o ! 
 ero . most nobl sir , aris ; the queen approach . 
 her head 's declin 'd , and death will seiz her but 
 your comfort make the rescu . 
 antoni . i have offend reputation- 
 a most unnobl swerv . 
 ero . sir , the queen . 
 antoni . o , whither hast thou led me , egypt ? see 
 how i convey my shame out of thine eye 
 by look back what i have left behind 
 'stroy 'd in dishonour . 
 cleopatra . o my lord , my lord , 
 forgiv my fear sail ! i littl thought 
 you would have follow . 
 antoni . egypt , thou knew'st too well 
 my heart wa to thi rudder tie by th ' string , 
 and thou shouldst tow me after . o'er my spirit 
 thi full supremaci thou knew'st , and that 
 thi beck might from the bid of the god 
 command me . 
 cleopatra . o , my pardon ! 
 antoni . now i must 
 to the young man send humbl treati , dodg 
 and palter in the shift of low , who 
 with half the bulk o ' th ' world play 'd as i plea 'd , 
 make and mar fortun . you did know 
 how much you were my conqueror , and that 
 my sword , made weak by my affect , would 
 obey it on all caus . 
 cleopatra . pardon , pardon ! 
 antoni . fall not a tear , i say ; one of them rate 
 all that is won and lost . give me a kiss ; 
 even thi repay me . 
 we sent our schoolmast ; is ' a come back ? 
 love , i am full of lead . some wine , 
 within there , and our viand ! fortun know 
 we scorn her most when most she offer blow . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xii . 
 caesar 's camp in egypt 
 
 enter caesar , agrippa , dolabella , thyreu , with other 
 
 caesar . let him appear that 's come from antoni . 
 know you him ? 
 dolabella . caesar , 't is hi schoolmast : 
 an argument that he is pluck 'd , when hither 
 he send so poor a pinion of hi wing , 
 which had superflu king for messeng 
 not mani moon gone by . 
 
 enter euphroniu , ambassador from antoni 
 
 caesar . approach , and speak . 
 euphroniu . such as i am , i come from antoni . 
 i wa of late as petti to hi end 
 as is the morn-dew on the myrtl leaf 
 to hi grand sea . 
 caesar . be't so . declar thine offic . 
 euphroniu . lord of hi fortun he salut thee , and 
 requir to live in egypt ; which not grant , 
 he lessen hi request and to thee sue 
 to let him breath between the heaven and earth , 
 a privat man in athen . thi for him . 
 next , cleopatra doe confess thi great , 
 submit her to thi might , and of thee crave 
 the circl of the ptolemi for her heir , 
 now hazard to thi grace . 
 caesar . for antoni , 
 i have no ear to hi request . the queen 
 of audienc nor desir shall fail , so she 
 from egypt drive her all-disgrac friend , 
 or take hi life there . thi if she perform , 
 she shall not sue unheard . so to them both . 
 euphroniu . fortun pursu thee ! 
 caesar . bring him through the band . exit euphroniu 
 [ to thyreu ] to tri thi eloqu , now 't is time . dispatch ; 
 from antoni win cleopatra . promis , 
 and in our name , what she requir ; add more , 
 from thine invent , offer . women are not 
 in their best fortun strong ; but want will perjur 
 the ne'er-touch 'd vestal . tri thi cun , thyreu ; 
 make thine own edict for thi pain , which we 
 will answer as a law . 
 thyreu . caesar , i go . 
 caesar . observ how antoni becom hi flaw , 
 and what thou think'st hi veri action speak 
 in everi power that move . 
 thyreu . caesar , i shall . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xiii . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter cleopatra , enobarbu , charmian , and ira 
 
 cleopatra . what shall we do , enobarbu ? 
 enobarbu . think , and die . 
 cleopatra . is antoni or we in fault for thi ? 
 enobarbu . antoni onli , that would make hi will 
 lord of hi reason . what though you fled 
 from that great face of war , whose sever rang 
 fright each other ? whi should he follow ? 
 the itch of hi affect should not then 
 have nick 'd hi captainship , at such a point , 
 when half to half the world oppo 'd , he be 
 the mere question . 't wa a shame no less 
 than wa hi loss , to cours your fli flag 
 and leav hi navi gaze . 
 cleopatra . prithe , peac . 
 
 enter euphroniu , the ambassador ; with antoni 
 
 antoni . is that hi answer ? 
 euphroniu . ay , my lord . 
 antoni . the queen shall then have courtesi , so she 
 will yield us up . 
 euphroniu . he say so . 
 antoni . let her know't . 
 to the boy caesar send thi grizzl head , 
 and he will fill thi wish to the brim 
 with princip . 
 cleopatra . that head , my lord ? 
 antoni . to him again . tell him he wear the rose 
 of youth upon him ; from which the world should note 
 someth particular . hi coin , ship , legion , 
 may be a coward 's whose minist would prevail 
 under the servic of a child as soon 
 as i ' th ' command of caesar . i dare him therefor 
 to lay hi gay comparison apart , 
 and answer me declin 'd , sword against sword , 
 ourselv alon . i 'll write it . follow me . 
 exeunt antoni and euphroniu 
 euphroniu . [ asid ] ye , like enough high-battl caesar will 
 unstat hi happi , and be stag 'd to th ' show 
 against a sworder ! i see men 's judgment are 
 a parcel of their fortun , and thing outward 
 do draw the inward qualiti after them , 
 to suffer all alik . that he should dream , 
 know all measur , the full caesar will 
 answer hi empti ! caesar , thou hast subdu 'd 
 hi judgment too . 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 servant . a messeng from caesar . 
 cleopatra . what , no more ceremoni ? see , my women ! 
 against the blown rose may they stop their nose 
 that kneel 'd unto the bud . admit him , sir . exit servant 
 enobarbu . [ asid ] mine honesti and i begin to squar . 
 the loyalti well held to fool doe make 
 our faith mere folli . yet he that can endur 
 to follow with allegi a fall'n lord 
 doe conquer him that did hi master conquer , 
 and earn a place i ' th ' stori . 
 
 enter thyreu 
 
 cleopatra . caesar 's will ? 
 thyreu . hear it apart . 
 cleopatra . none but friend : say boldli . 
 thyreu . so , hapli , are they friend to antoni . 
 enobarbu . he need as mani , sir , as caesar ha , 
 or need not us . if caesar pleas , our master 
 will leap to be hi friend . for us , you know 
 whose he is we are , and that is caesar 's . 
 thyreu . so . 
 thu then , thou most renown 'd : caesar entreat 
 not to consid in what case thou stand'st 
 further than he is caesar . 
 cleopatra . go on . right royal ! 
 thyreu . he know that you embrac not antoni 
 as you did love , but as you fear 'd him . 
 cleopatra . o ! 
 thyreu . the scar upon your honour , therefor , he 
 doe piti , as constrain blemish , 
 not as deserv 'd . 
 cleopatra . he is a god , and know 
 what is most right . mine honour wa not yield , 
 but conquer 'd mere . 
 enobarbu . [ asid ] to be sure of that , 
 i will ask antoni . sir , sir , thou art so leaki 
 that we must leav thee to thi sink , for 
 thi dearest quit thee . exit 
 thyreu . shall i say to caesar 
 what you requir of him ? for he partli beg 
 to be desir 'd to give . it much would pleas him 
 that of hi fortun you should make a staff 
 to lean upon . but it would warm hi spirit 
 to hear from me you had left antoni , 
 and put yourself under hi shroud , 
 the univers landlord . 
 cleopatra . what 's your name ? 
 thyreu . my name is thyreu . 
 cleopatra . most kind messeng , 
 say to great caesar thi : in deput 
 i kiss hi conqur hand . tell him i am prompt 
 to lay my crown at 's feet , and there to kneel . 
 tell him from hi all-obey breath i hear 
 the doom of egypt . 
 thyreu . 't is your noblest cours . 
 wisdom and fortun combat togeth , 
 if that the former dare but what it can , 
 no chanc may shake it . give me grace to lay 
 my duti on your hand . 
 cleopatra . your caesar 's father oft , 
 when he hath mu 'd of take kingdom in , 
 bestow 'd hi lip on that unworthi place , 
 as it rain 'd kiss . 
 
 re-ent antoni and enobarbu 
 
 antoni . favour , by jove that thunder ! 
 what art thou , fellow ? 
 thyreu . one that but perform 
 the bid of the fullest man , and worthiest 
 to have command obey 'd . 
 enobarbu . [ asid ] you will be whipt . 
 antoni . approach there.- ah , you kite ! - now , god and devil ! 
 author melt from me . of late , when i cri 'ho ! ' 
 like boy unto a muss , king would start forth 
 and cri 'your will ? ' have you no ear ? i am 
 antoni yet . 
 
 enter servant 
 
 take henc thi jack and whip him . 
 enobarbu . 't is better play with a lion 's whelp 
 than with an old one die . 
 antoni . moon and star ! 
 whip him . were't twenti of the greatest tributari 
 that do acknowledg caesar , should i find them 
 so sauci with the hand of she here- what 's her name 
 sinc she wa cleopatra ? whip him , fellow , 
 till like a boy you see him cring hi face , 
 and whine aloud for merci . take him henc . 
 thymu . mark antony- 
 antoni . tug him away . be whipt , 
 bring him again : the jack of caesar 's shall 
 bear us an errand to him . exeunt servant with thyreu 
 you were half blast ere i knew you . ha ! 
 have i my pillow left unpress 'd in rome , 
 forborn the get of a law race , 
 and by a gem of women , to be abu 'd 
 by one that look on feeder ? 
 cleopatra . good my lord- 
 antoni . you have been a boggler ever . 
 but when we in our vicious grow hard- 
 o miseri o n't ! - the wise god seel our eye , 
 in our own filth drop our clear judgment , make us 
 ador our error , laugh at 's while we strut 
 to our confus . 
 cleopatra . o , is't come to thi ? 
 antoni . i found you as a morsel cold upon 
 dead caesar 's trencher . nay , you were a fragment 
 of cneiu pompey 's , besid what hotter hour , 
 unregist'r in vulgar fame , you have 
 luxuri pick 'd out ; for i am sure , 
 though you can guess what temper should be , 
 you know not what it is . 
 cleopatra . wherefor is thi ? 
 antoni . to let a fellow that will take reward , 
 and say 'god quit you ! ' be familiar with 
 my playfellow , your hand , thi kingli seal 
 and plighter of high heart ! o that i were 
 upon the hill of basan to outroar 
 the horn herd ! for i have savag caus , 
 and to proclaim it civilli were like 
 a halter 'd neck which doe the hangman thank 
 for be yare about him . 
 
 re-ent a servant with thyreu 
 
 is he whipt ? 
 servant . soundli , my lord . 
 antoni . cri he ? and begg 'd ' a pardon ? 
 servant . he did ask favour . 
 antoni . if that thi father live , let him repent 
 thou wast not made hi daughter ; and be thou sorri 
 to follow caesar in hi triumph , sinc 
 thou hast been whipt for follow him . henceforth 
 the white hand of a ladi fever thee ! 
 shake thou to look o n't . get thee back to caesar ; 
 tell him thi entertain ; look thou say 
 he make me angri with him ; for he seem 
 proud and disdain , harp on what i am , 
 not what he knew i wa . he make me angri ; 
 and at thi time most easi 't is to do't , 
 when my good star , that were my former guid , 
 have empti left their orb and shot their fire 
 into th ' abysm of hell . if he mislik 
 my speech and what is done , tell him he ha 
 hipparchu , my enfranch bondman , whom 
 he may at pleasur whip or hang or tortur , 
 as he shall like , to quit me . urg it thou . 
 henc with thi stripe , be gone . exit thyreu 
 cleopatra . have you done yet ? 
 antoni . alack , our terren moon 
 is now eclip 'd , and it portend alon 
 the fall of antoni . 
 cleopatra . i must stay hi time . 
 antoni . to flatter caesar , would you mingl eye 
 with one that tie hi point ? 
 cleopatra . not know me yet ? 
 antoni . cold-heart toward me ? 
 cleopatra . ah , dear , if i be so , 
 from my cold heart let heaven engend hail , 
 and poison it in the sourc , and the first stone 
 drop in my neck ; as it determin , so 
 dissolv my life ! the next caesarion smite ! 
 till by degre the memori of my womb , 
 togeth with my brave egyptian all , 
 by the discandi of thi pellet storm , 
 lie graveless , till the fli and gnat of nile 
 have buri them for prey . 
 antoni . i am satisfi . 
 caesar sit down in alexandria , where 
 i will oppos hi fate . our forc by land 
 hath nobli held ; our sever 'd navi to 
 have knit again , and fleet , threat'n most sea-lik . 
 where hast thou been , my heart ? dost thou hear , ladi ? 
 if from the field i shall return onc more 
 to kiss these lip , i will appear in blood . 
 i and my sword will earn our chronicl . 
 there 's hope i n't yet . 
 cleopatra . that 's my brave lord ! 
 antoni . i will be treble-sinew 'd , heart , breath 'd , 
 and fight malici . for when mine hour 
 were nice and lucki , men did ransom live 
 of me for jest ; but now i 'll set my teeth , 
 and send to dark all that stop me . come , 
 let 's have one other gaudi night . call to me 
 all my sad captain ; fill our bowl onc more ; 
 let 's mock the midnight bell . 
 cleopatra . it is my birthday . 
 i had thought t'have held it poor ; but sinc my lord 
 is antoni again , i will be cleopatra . 
 antoni . we will yet do well . 
 cleopatra . call all hi nobl captain to my lord . 
 antoni . do so , we 'll speak to them ; and to-night i 'll forc 
 the wine peep through their scar . come on , my queen , 
 there 's sap i n't yet . the next time i do fight 
 i 'll make death love me ; for i will contend 
 even with hi pestil scyth . exeunt all but enobarbu 
 enobarbu . now he 'll outstar the lightn . to be furiou 
 is to be fright out of fear , and in that mood 
 the dove will peck the estridg ; and i see still 
 a diminut in our captain 's brain 
 restor hi heart . when valour prey on reason , 
 it eat the sword it fight with . i will seek 
 some way to leav him . exit 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 act iv . scene i . 
 caesar 's camp befor alexandria 
 
 enter caesar , agrippa , and maecena , with hi armi ; 
 caesar read a letter 
 
 caesar . he call me boy , and chide as he had power 
 to beat me out of egypt . my messeng 
 he hath whipt with rod ; dare me to person combat , 
 caesar to antoni . let the old ruffian know 
 i have mani other way to die , meantim 
 laugh at hi challeng . 
 maecena . caesar must think 
 when one so great begin to rage , he 's hunt 
 even to fall . give him no breath , but now 
 make boot of hi distract . never anger 
 made good guard for itself . 
 caesar . let our best head 
 know that to-morrow the last of mani battl 
 we mean to fight . within our file there are 
 of those that serv 'd mark antoni but late 
 enough to fetch him in . see it done ; 
 and feast the armi ; we have store to do't , 
 and they have earn 'd the wast . poor antoni ! exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene ii . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter antoni , cleopatra , enobarbu , charmian , ira , 
 alexa , with other 
 
 antoni . he will not fight with me , domitiu ? 
 enobarbu . no . 
 antoni . whi should he not ? 
 enobarbu . he think , be twenti time of better fortun , 
 he is twenti men to one . 
 antoni . to-morrow , soldier , 
 by sea and land i 'll fight . or i will live , 
 or bath my die honour in the blood 
 shall make it live again . woo't thou fight well ? 
 enobarbu . i 'll strike , and cri 'take all . ' 
 antoni . well said ; come on . 
 call forth my household servant ; let 's to-night 
 be bounteou at our meal . 
 
 enter three or four servitor 
 
 give me thi hand , 
 thou ha been rightli honest . so hast thou ; 
 thou , and thou , and thou . you have serv 'd me well , 
 and king have been your fellow . 
 cleopatra . [ asid to enobarbu ] what mean thi ? 
 enobarbu . [ asid to cleopatra ] 't is one of those odd trick which 
 sorrow shoot 
 out of the mind . 
 antoni . and thou art honest too . 
 i wish i could be made so mani men , 
 and all of you clapp 'd up togeth in 
 an antoni , that i might do you servic 
 so good as you have done . 
 servant . the god forbid ! 
 antoni . well , my good fellow , wait on me to-night . 
 scant not my cup , and make as much of me 
 as when mine empir wa your fellow too , 
 and suffer 'd my command . 
 cleopatra . [ asid to enobarbu ] what doe he mean ? 
 enobarbu . [ asid to cleopatra ] to make hi follow weep . 
 antoni . tend me to-night ; 
 may be it is the period of your duti . 
 hapli you shall not see me more ; or if , 
 a mangl shadow . perchanc to-morrow 
 you 'll serv anoth master . i look on you 
 as one that take hi leav . mine honest friend , 
 i turn you not away ; but , like a master 
 marri to your good servic , stay till death . 
 tend me to-night two hour , i ask no more , 
 and the god yield you for't ! 
 enobarbu . what mean you , sir , 
 to give them thi discomfort ? look , they weep ; 
 and i , an ass , am onion-ey 'd . for shame ! 
 transform us not to women . 
 antoni . ho , ho , ho ! 
 now the witch take me if i meant it thu ! 
 grace grow where those drop fall ! my hearti friend , 
 you take me in too dolor a sens ; 
 for i spake to you for your comfort , did desir you 
 to burn thi night with torch . know , my heart , 
 i hope well of to-morrow , and will lead you 
 where rather i 'll expect victori life 
 than death and honour . let 's to supper , come , 
 and drown consider . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene iii . 
 alexandria . befor cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter a compani of soldier 
 
 first soldier . brother , good night . to-morrow is the day . 
 second soldier . it will determin one way . fare you well . 
 heard you of noth strang about the street ? 
 first soldier . noth . what news ? 
 second soldier . belik 't is but a rumour . good night to you . 
 first soldier . well , sir , good night . 
 [ they meet other soldier ] 
 second soldier . soldier , have care watch . 
 first soldier . and you . good night , good night . 
 [ the two compani separ and place themselv 
 in everi corner of the stage ] 
 second soldier . here we . and if to-morrow 
 our navi thrive , i have an absolut hope 
 our landmen will stand up . 
 third soldier . 't is a brave armi , 
 and full of purpos . 
 [ music of the hautboy is under the stage ] 
 second soldier . peac , what nois ? 
 third soldier . list , list ! 
 second soldier . hark ! 
 third soldier . music i ' th ' air . 
 fourth soldier . under the earth . 
 third soldier . it sign well , doe it not ? 
 fourth soldier . no . 
 third soldier . peac , i say ! 
 what should thi mean ? 
 second soldier . 't is the god hercul , whom antoni lov 'd , 
 now leav him . 
 third soldier . walk ; let 's see if other watchmen 
 do hear what we do . 
 second soldier . how now , master ! 
 soldier . [ speak togeth ] how now ! 
 how now ! do you hear thi ? 
 first soldier . ay ; is't not strang ? 
 third soldier . do you hear , master ? do you hear ? 
 first soldier . follow the nois so far as we have quarter ; 
 let 's see how it will give off . 
 soldier . content . 't is strang . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene iv . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter antoni and cleopatra , charmian , ira , 
 with other 
 
 antoni . ero ! mine armour , ero ! 
 cleopatra . sleep a littl . 
 antoni . no , my chuck . ero ! come , mine armour , ero ! 
 
 enter ero with armour 
 
 come , good fellow , put mine iron on . 
 if fortun be not our to-day , it is 
 becaus we brave her . come . 
 cleopatra . nay , i 'll help too . 
 what 's thi for ? 
 antoni . ah , let be , let be ! thou art 
 the armour of my heart . fals , fals ; thi , thi . 
 cleopatra . sooth , la , i 'll help . thu it must be . 
 antoni . well , well ; 
 we shall thrive now . seest thou , my good fellow ? 
 go put on thi defenc . 
 ero . briefli , sir . 
 cleopatra . is not thi buckl well ? 
 antoni . rare , rare ! 
 he that unbuckl thi , till we do pleas 
 to daff't for our repos , shall hear a storm . 
 thou fumblest , ero , and my queen 's a squir 
 more tight at thi than thou . dispatch . o love , 
 that thou couldst see my war to-day , and knew'st 
 the royal occup ! thou shouldst see 
 a workman i n't . 
 
 enter an arm soldier 
 
 good-morrow to thee . welcom . 
 thou look'st like him that know a warlik charg . 
 to busi that we love we rise betim , 
 and go to't with delight . 
 soldier . a thousand , sir , 
 earli though't be , have on their rivet trim , 
 and at the port expect you . 
 [ shout . flourish of trumpet within ] 
 
 enter captain and soldier 
 
 captain . the morn is fair . good morrow , gener . 
 all . good morrow , gener . 
 antoni . 't is well blown , lad . 
 thi morn , like the spirit of a youth 
 that mean to be of note , begin betim . 
 so , so . come , give me that . thi way . well said . 
 fare thee well , dame , whate' becom of me . 
 thi is a soldier 's kiss . rebuk , 
 and worthi shame check it were , to stand 
 on more mechan compliment ; i 'll leav thee 
 now like a man of steel . you that will fight , 
 follow me close ; i 'll bring you to't . adieu . 
 exeunt antoni , ero , captain and soldier 
 charmian . pleas you retir to your chamber ? 
 cleopatra . lead me . 
 he goe forth gallantli . that he and caesar might 
 determin thi great war in singl fight ! 
 then , antony- but now . well , on . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene v. 
 alexandria . antoni 's camp 
 
 trumpet sound . enter antoni and ero , a soldier 
 meet them 
 
 soldier . the god make thi a happi day to antoni ! 
 antoni . would thou and those thi scar had onc prevail 'd 
 to make me fight at land ! 
 soldier . hadst thou done so , 
 the king that have revolt , and the soldier 
 that ha thi morn left thee , would have still 
 follow thi heel . 
 antoni . who 's gone thi morn ? 
 soldier . who ? 
 one ever near thee . call for enobarbu , 
 he shall not hear thee ; or from caesar 's camp 
 say ' i am none of thine . ' 
 antoni . what say'st thou ? 
 soldier . sir , 
 he is with caesar . 
 ero . sir , hi chest and treasur 
 he ha not with him . 
 antoni . is he gone ? 
 soldier . most certain . 
 antoni . go , ero , send hi treasur after ; do it ; 
 detain no jot , i charg thee . write to him- 
 i will subscribe- gentl adieu and greet ; 
 say that i wish he never find more caus 
 to chang a master . o , my fortun have 
 corrupt honest men ! dispatch . enobarbu ! exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene vi . 
 alexandria . caesar 's camp 
 
 flourish . enter agrippa , caesar , with dolabella 
 and enobarbu 
 
 caesar . go forth , agrippa , and begin the fight . 
 our will is antoni be took aliv ; 
 make it so known . 
 agrippa . caesar , i shall . exit 
 caesar . the time of univers peac is near . 
 prove thi a prosp'rou day , the three-nook 'd world 
 shall bear the oliv freeli . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . antoni 
 is come into the field . 
 caesar . go charg agrippa 
 plant those that have revolt in the vant , 
 that antoni may seem to spend hi furi 
 upon himself . exeunt all but enobarbu 
 enobarbu . alexa did revolt and went to jewri on 
 affair of antoni ; there did dissuad 
 great herod to inclin himself to caesar 
 and leav hi master antoni . for thi pain 
 casaer hath hang 'd him . canidiu and the rest 
 that fell away have entertain , but 
 no honour trust . i have done ill , 
 of which i do accus myself so sore 
 that i will joy no more . 
 
 enter a soldier of caesar 's 
 
 soldier . enobarbu , antoni 
 hath after thee sent all thi treasur , with 
 hi bounti overplu . the messeng 
 came on my guard , and at thi tent is now 
 unload of hi mule . 
 enobarbu . i give it you . 
 soldier . mock not , enobarbu . 
 i tell you true . best you saf 'd the bringer 
 out of the host . i must attend mine offic , 
 or would have done't myself . your emperor 
 continu still a jove . exit 
 enobarbu . i am alon the villain of the earth , 
 and feel i am so most . o antoni , 
 thou mine of bounti , how wouldst thou have paid 
 my better servic , when my turpitud 
 thou dost so crown with gold ! thi blow my heart . 
 if swift thought break it not , a swifter mean 
 shall outstrik thought ; but thought will do't , i feel . 
 i fight against thee ? no ! i will go seek 
 some ditch wherein to die ; the foul'st best fit 
 my latter part of life . exit 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene vii . 
 field of battl between the camp 
 
 alarum . drum and trumpet . enter agrippa 
 and other 
 
 agrippa . retir . we have engag 'd ourselv too far . 
 caesar himself ha work , and our oppress 
 exce what we expect . exeunt 
 
 alarum . enter antoni , and scaru wound 
 
 scaru . o my brave emperor , thi is fought inde ! 
 had we done so at first , we had droven them home 
 with clout about their head . 
 antoni . thou bleed'st apac . 
 scaru . i had a wound here that wa like a t , 
 but now 't is made an h. 
 antoni . they do retir . 
 scaru . we 'll beat'em into bench-hol . i have yet 
 room for six scotch more . 
 
 enter ero 
 
 ero . they are beaten , sir , and our advantag serv 
 for a fair victori . 
 scaru . let us score their back 
 and snatch 'em up , as we take hare , behind . 
 't is sport to maul a runner . 
 antoni . i will reward thee 
 onc for thi sprightli comfort , and tenfold 
 for thi good valour . come thee on . 
 scaru . i 'll halt after . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene viii . 
 under the wall of alexandria 
 
 alarum . enter antoni , again in a march ; scaru 
 with other 
 
 antoni . we have beat him to hi camp . run one befor 
 and let the queen know of our gest . to-morrow , 
 befor the sun shall see 's , we 'll spill the blood 
 that ha to-day escap 'd . i thank you all ; 
 for doughty-hand are you , and have fought 
 not as you serv 'd the caus , but as't had been 
 each man 's like mine ; you have shown all hector . 
 enter the citi , clip your wive , your friend , 
 tell them your feat ; whilst they with joy tear 
 wash the congeal from your wound and kiss 
 the honour 'd gash whole . 
 
 enter cleopatra , attend 
 
 [ to scaru ] give me thi hand- 
 to thi great fairi i 'll commend thi act , 
 make her thank bless thee . o thou day o ' th ' world , 
 chain mine arm 'd neck . leap thou , attir and all , 
 through proof of har to my heart , and there 
 ride on the pant triumph . 
 cleopatra . lord of lord ! 
 o infinit virtu , com'st thou smile from 
 the world 's great snare uncaught ? 
 antoni . mine nightingal , 
 we have beat them to their bed . what , girl ! though grey 
 do someth mingl with our younger brown , yet ha ' we 
 a brain that nourish our nerv , and can 
 get goal for goal of youth . behold thi man ; 
 commend unto hi lip thi favour hand- 
 kiss it , my warrior- he hath fought to-day 
 as if a god in hate of mankind had 
 destroy in such a shape . 
 cleopatra . i 'll give thee , friend , 
 an armour all of gold ; it wa a king 's . 
 antoni . he ha deserv 'd it , were it carbuncl 
 like holi phoebu ' car . give me thi hand . 
 through alexandria make a jolli march ; 
 bear our hack 'd target like the men that owe them . 
 had our great palac the capac 
 to camp thi host , we all would sup togeth , 
 and drink carous to the next day 's fate , 
 which promis royal peril . trumpet , 
 with brazen din blast you the citi 's ear ; 
 make mingl with our rattl tabourin , 
 that heaven and earth may strike their sound togeth 
 applaud our approach . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene ix . 
 caesar 's camp 
 
 enter a centurion and hi compani ; enobarbu follow 
 
 centurion . if we be not reliev 'd within thi hour , 
 we must return to th ' court of guard . the night 
 is shini , and they say we shall embattl 
 by th ' second hour i ' th ' morn . 
 first watch . thi last day wa 
 a shrewd one to 's . 
 enobarbu . o , bear me wit , night- 
 second watch . what man is thi ? 
 first watch . stand close and list him . 
 enobarbu . be wit to me , o thou bless moon , 
 when men revolt shall upon record 
 bear hate memori , poor enobarbu did 
 befor thi face repent ! 
 centurion . enobarbu ? 
 second watch . peac ! 
 hark further . 
 enobarbu . o sovereign mistress of true melancholi , 
 the poison damp of night dispong upon me , 
 that life , a veri rebel to my will , 
 may hang no longer on me . throw my heart 
 against the flint and hard of my fault , 
 which , be dri with grief , will break to powder , 
 and finish all foul thought . o antoni , 
 nobler than my revolt is infam , 
 forgiv me in thine own particular , 
 but let the world rank me in regist 
 a master-leav and a fugit ! 
 o antoni ! o antoni ! [ die ] 
 first watch . let 's speak to him . 
 centurion . let 's hear him , for the thing he speak 
 may concern caesar . 
 second watch . let 's do so . but he sleep . 
 centurion . swoon rather ; for so bad a prayer as hi 
 wa never yet for sleep . 
 first watch . go we to him . 
 second watch . awak , sir , awak ; speak to us . 
 first watch . hear you , sir ? 
 centurion . the hand of death hath raught him . 
 [ drum afar off ] hark ! the drum 
 demur wake the sleeper . let us bear him 
 to th ' court of guard ; he is of note . our hour 
 is fulli out . 
 second watch . come on , then ; 
 he may recov yet . exeunt with the bodi 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene x . 
 between the two camp 
 
 enter antoni and scaru , with their armi 
 
 antoni . their prepar is to-day by sea ; 
 we pleas them not by land . 
 scaru . for both , my lord . 
 antoni . i would they 'd fight i ' th ' fire or i ' th ' air ; 
 we 'd fight there too . but thi it is , our foot 
 upon the hill adjoin to the citi 
 shall stay with us- order for sea is given ; 
 they have put forth the haven- 
 where their appoint we may best discov 
 and look on their endeavour . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xi . 
 between the camp 
 
 enter caesar and hi armi 
 
 caesar . but be charg 'd , we will be still by land , 
 which , as i take't , we shall ; for hi best forc 
 is forth to man hi galley . to the vale , 
 and hold our best advantag . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xii . 
 a hill near alexandria 
 
 enter antoni and scaru 
 
 antoni . yet they are not join 'd . where yond pine doe stand 
 i shall discov all . i 'll bring thee word 
 straight how 't is like to go . exit 
 scaru . swallow have built 
 in cleopatra 's sail their nest . the augur 
 say they know not , they can not tell ; look grimli , 
 and dare not speak their knowledg . antoni 
 is valiant and deject ; and by start 
 hi fret fortun give him hope and fear 
 of what he ha and ha not . 
 [ alarum afar off , as at a sea-fight ] 
 
 re-ent antoni 
 
 antoni . all is lost ! 
 thi foul egyptian hath betray me . 
 my fleet hath yield to the foe , and yonder 
 they cast their cap up and carous togeth 
 like friend long lost . triple-turn 'd whore ! 't is thou 
 hast sold me to thi novic ; and my heart 
 make onli war on thee . bid them all fli ; 
 for when i am reveng 'd upon my charm , 
 i have done all . bid them all fli ; begon . exit scaru 
 o sun , thi upris shall i see no more ! 
 fortun and antoni part here ; even here 
 do we shake hand . all come to thi ? the heart 
 that spaniel 'd me at heel , to whom i gave 
 their wish , do discandi , melt their sweet 
 on blossom caesar ; and thi pine is bark 'd 
 that overtopp 'd them all . betray 'd i am . 
 o thi fals soul of egypt ! thi grave charm- 
 whose eye beck 'd forth my war and call 'd them home , 
 whose bosom wa my crownet , my chief end- 
 like a right gypsi hath at fast and loos 
 beguil 'd me to the veri heart of loss . 
 what , ero , ero ! 
 
 enter cleopatra 
 
 ah , thou spell ! avaunt ! 
 cleopatra . whi is my lord enrag 'd against hi love ? 
 antoni . vanish , or i shall give thee thi deserv 
 and blemish caesar 's triumph . let him take thee 
 and hoist thee up to the shout plebeian ; 
 follow hi chariot , like the greatest spot 
 of all thi sex ; most monster-lik , be shown 
 for poor'st diminut , for doit , and let 
 patient octavia plough thi visag up 
 with her prepar nail . exit cleopatra 
 't is well th'art gone , 
 if it be well to live ; but better 'twere 
 thou fell'st into my furi , for one death 
 might have prevent mani . ero , ho ! 
 the shirt of nessu is upon me ; teach me , 
 alcid , thou mine ancestor , thi rage ; 
 let me lodg licha on the horn o ' th ' moon , 
 and with those hand that grasp 'd the heaviest club 
 subdu my worthiest self . the witch shall die . 
 to the young roman boy she hath sold me , and i fall 
 under thi plot . she die for't . ero , ho ! exit 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xiii . 
 alexandria . cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter cleopatra , charmian , ira , and mardian 
 
 cleopatra . help me , my women . o , he is more mad 
 than telamon for hi shield ; the boar of thessali 
 wa never so emboss 'd . 
 charmian . to th'monument ! 
 there lock yourself , and send him word you are dead . 
 the soul and bodi rive not more in part 
 than great go off . 
 cleopatra . to th ' monument ! 
 mardian , go tell him i have slain myself ; 
 say that the last i spoke wa 'antoni ' 
 and word it , prithe , piteous . henc , mardian , 
 and bring me how he take my death . to th ' monument ! 
 exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xiv . 
 cleopatra 's palac 
 
 enter antoni and ero 
 
 antoni . ero , thou yet behold'st me ? 
 ero . ay , nobl lord . 
 antoni . sometim we see a cloud that 's dragonish ; 
 a vapour sometim like a bear or lion , 
 a tower 'd citadel , a pendent rock , 
 a fork mountain , or blue promontori 
 with tree upo n't that nod unto the world 
 and mock our eye with air . thou hast seen these sign ; 
 they are black vesper 's pageant . 
 ero . ay , my lord . 
 antoni . that which is now a hors , even with a thought 
 the rack dislimn , and make it indistinct , 
 as water is in water . 
 ero . it doe , my lord . 
 antoni . my good knave ero , now thi captain is 
 even such a bodi . here i am antoni ; 
 yet can not hold thi visibl shape , my knave . 
 i made these war for egypt ; and the queen- 
 whose heart i thought i had , for she had mine , 
 which , whilst it wa mine , had annex 'd unto't 
 a million moe , now lost- she , ero , ha 
 pack 'd card with caesar , and false-play 'd my glori 
 unto an enemi 's triumph . 
 nay , weep not , gentl ero ; there is left us 
 ourselv to end ourselv . 
 
 enter mardian 
 
 o , thi vile ladi ! 
 she ha robb 'd me of my sword . 
 mardian . no , antoni ; 
 my mistress lov 'd thee , and her fortun mingl 
 with thine entir . 
 antoni . henc , sauci eunuch ; peac ! 
 she hath betray 'd me , and shall die the death . 
 mardian . death of one person can be paid but onc , 
 and that she ha discharg 'd . what thou wouldst do 
 is done unto thi hand . the last she spake 
 wa 'antoni ! most nobl antoni ! ' 
 then in the midst a tear groan did break 
 the name of antoni ; it wa divid 
 between her heart and lip . she rend'r life , 
 thi name so buri in her . 
 antoni . dead then ? 
 mardian . dead . 
 antoni . unarm , ero ; the long day 's task is done , 
 and we must sleep . that thou depart'st henc safe 
 doe pay thi labour richli . go . exit mardian 
 off , pluck off ! 
 the sevenfold shield of ajax can not keep 
 the batteri from my heart . o , cleav , my side ! 
 heart , onc be stronger than thi contin , 
 crack thi frail case . apac , ero , apace.- 
 no more a soldier . bruis piec , go ; 
 you have been nobli borne.- from me awhil . exit ero 
 i will o'ertak thee , cleopatra , and 
 weep for my pardon . so it must be , for now 
 all length is tortur . sinc the torch is out , 
 lie down , and stray no farther . now all labour 
 mar what it doe ; yea , veri forc entangl 
 itself with strength . seal then , and all is done . 
 ero ! - i come , my queen.- ero ! - stay for me ; 
 where soul do couch on flower , we 'll hand in hand , 
 and with our sprightli port make the ghost gaze . 
 dido and her aenea shall want troop , 
 and all the haunt be ours.- come , ero , ero ! 
 
 re-ent ero 
 
 ero . what would my lord ? 
 antoni . sinc cleopatra die , 
 i have liv 'd in such dishonour that the god 
 detest my base . i , that with my sword 
 quarter 'd the world , and o'er green neptun 's back 
 with ship made citi , condemn myself to lack 
 the courag of a woman ; less nobl mind 
 than she which by her death our caesar tell 
 ' i am conqueror of myself . ' thou art sworn , ero , 
 that , when the exig should come- which now 
 is come indeed- when i should see behind me 
 th ' inevit prosecut of 
 disgrac and horror , that , on my command , 
 thou then wouldst kill me . do't ; the time is come . 
 thou strik'st not me ; 't is caesar thou defeat'st . 
 put colour in thi cheek . 
 ero . the god withhold me ! 
 shall i do that which all the parthian dart , 
 though enemi , lost aim and could not ? 
 antoni . ero , 
 wouldst thou be window 'd in great rome and see 
 thi master thu with pleach 'd arm , bend down 
 hi corrig neck , hi face subdu 'd 
 to penetr shame , whilst the wheel 'd seat 
 of fortun caesar , drawn befor him , brand 
 hi base that ensu ? 
 ero . i would not see't . 
 antoni . come , then ; for with a wound i must be cur 'd . 
 draw that thi honest sword , which thou hast worn 
 most use for thi countri . 
 ero . o , sir , pardon me ! 
 antoni . when i did make thee free , swor'st thou not then 
 to do thi when i bade thee ? do it at onc , 
 or thi preced servic are all 
 but accid unpurpo 'd . draw , and come . 
 ero . turn from me then that nobl counten , 
 wherein the worship of the whole world lie . 
 antoni . lo thee ! [ turn from him ] 
 ero . my sword is drawn . 
 antoni . then let it do at onc 
 the thing whi thou hast drawn it . 
 ero . my dear master , 
 my captain and my emperor , let me say , 
 befor i strike thi bloodi stroke , farewel . 
 antoni . 't is said , man ; and farewel . 
 ero . farewel , great chief . shall i strike now ? 
 antoni . now , ero . 
 ero . whi , there then ! thu do i escap the sorrow 
 of antoni 's death . [ kill himself 
 antoni . thrice nobler than myself ! 
 thou teachest me , o valiant ero , what 
 i should , and thou couldst not . my queen and ero 
 have , by their brave instruct , got upon me 
 a nobl in record . but i will be 
 a bridegroom in my death , and run into't 
 as to a lover 's bed . come , then ; and , ero , 
 thi master die thi scholar . to do thu 
 [ fall on hi sword ] 
 i learn 'd of thee . how ? not dead ? not dead ? - 
 the guard , ho ! o , dispatch me ! 
 
 enter derceta and a guard 
 
 first guard . what 's the nois ? 
 antoni . i have done my work ill , friend . o , make an end 
 of what i have begun . 
 second guard . the star is fall'n . 
 first guard . and time is at hi period . 
 all . ala , and woe ! 
 antoni . let him that love me , strike me dead . 
 first guard . not i . 
 second guard . nor i . 
 third guard . nor ani one . exeunt guard 
 derceta . thi death and fortun bid thi follow fli . 
 thi sword but shown to caesar , with thi tide , 
 shall enter me with him . 
 
 enter diomed 
 
 diomed . where 's antoni ? 
 derceta . there , diom , there . 
 diomed . live he ? 
 wilt thou not answer , man ? exit derceta 
 antoni . art thou there , diom ? draw thi sword and give me 
 suffic stroke for death . 
 diomed . most absolut lord , 
 my mistress cleopatra sent me to thee . 
 antoni . when did she send thee ? 
 diomed . now , my lord . 
 antoni . where is she ? 
 diomed . lock 'd in her monument . she had a prophesi fear 
 of what hath come to pass ; for when she saw- 
 which never shall be found- you did suspect 
 she had dispo 'd with caesar , and that your rage 
 would not be purg 'd , she sent you word she wa dead ; 
 but fear sinc how it might work , hath sent 
 me to proclaim the truth ; and i am come , 
 i dread , too late . 
 antoni . too late , good diom . call my guard , i prithe . 
 diomed . what , ho ! the emperor 's guard ! the guard , what ho ! 
 come , your lord call ! 
 
 enter four or five of the guard of antoni 
 
 antoni . bear me , good friend , where cleopatra bide ; 
 't is the last servic that i shall command you . 
 first guard . woe , woe are we , sir , you may not live to wear 
 all your true follow out . 
 all . most heavi day ! 
 antoni . nay , good my fellow , do not pleas sharp fate 
 to grace it with your sorrow . bid that welcom 
 which come to punish us , and we punish it , 
 seem to bear it lightli . take me up . 
 i have led you oft ; carri me now , good friend , 
 and have my thank for all . exeunt , hear antoni 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene xv . 
 alexandria . a monument 
 
 enter cleopatra and her maid aloft , with charmian 
 and ira 
 
 cleopatra . o charmian , i will never go from henc ! 
 charmian . be comfort , dear madam . 
 cleopatra . no , i will not . 
 all strang and terribl event are welcom , 
 but comfort we despis ; our size of sorrow , 
 proport 'd to our caus , must be as great 
 as that which make it . 
 
 enter diomed , below 
 
 how now ! is he dead ? 
 diomed . hi death 's upon him , but not dead . 
 look out o ' th ' other side your monument ; 
 hi guard have brought him thither . 
 
 enter , below , antoni , born by the guard 
 
 cleopatra . o sun , 
 burn the great sphere thou mov'st in ! darkl stand 
 the vari shore o ' th ' world . o antoni , 
 antoni , antoni ! help , charmian ; help , ira , help ; 
 help , friend below ! let 's draw him hither . 
 antoni . peac ! 
 not caesar 's valour hath o'erthrown antoni , 
 but antoni 's hath triumph 'd on itself . 
 cleopatra . so it should be , that none but antoni 
 should conquer antoni ; but woe 't is so ! 
 antoni . i am die , egypt , die ; onli 
 i here importun death awhil , until 
 of mani thousand kiss the poor last 
 i lay upon thi lip . 
 cleopatra . i dare not , dear . 
 dear my lord , pardon ! i dare not , 
 lest i be taken . not th ' imperi show 
 of the full-fortun 'd caesar ever shall 
 be brooch 'd with me . if knife , drug , serpent , have 
 edg , sting , or oper , i am safe . 
 your wife octavia , with her modest eye 
 and still conclus , shall acquir no honour 
 demur upon me . but come , come , antony- 
 help me , my women- we must draw thee up ; 
 assist , good friend . 
 antoni . o , quick , or i am gone . 
 cleopatra . here 's sport inde ! how heavi weigh my lord ! 
 our strength is all gone into heavi ; 
 that make the weight . had i great juno 's power , 
 the strong-w 'd mercuri should fetch thee up , 
 and set thee by jove 's side . yet come a littl . 
 wisher were ever fool . o come , come , 
 [ they heav antoni aloft to cleopatra ] 
 and welcom , welcom ! die where thou hast liv 'd . 
 quicken with kiss . had my lip that power , 
 thu would i wear them out . 
 all . a heavi sight ! 
 antoni . i am die , egypt , die . 
 give me some wine , and let me speak a littl . 
 cleopatra . no , let me speak ; and let me rail so high 
 that the fals huswif fortun break her wheel , 
 provok 'd by my offenc . 
 antoni . one word , sweet queen : 
 of caesar seek your honour , with your safeti . o ! 
 cleopatra . they do not go togeth . 
 antoni . gentl , hear me : 
 none about caesar trust but proculeiu . 
 cleopatra . my resolut and my hand i 'll trust ; 
 none about caesar 
 antoni . the miser chang now at my end 
 lament nor sorrow at ; but pleas your thought 
 in feed them with those my former fortun 
 wherein i liv 'd the greatest princ o ' th ' world , 
 the noblest ; and do now not base die , 
 not cowardli put off my helmet to 
 my countryman- a roman by a roman 
 valiantli vanquish 'd . now my spirit is go 
 i can no more . 
 cleopatra . noblest of men , woo't die ? 
 hast thou no care of me ? shall i abid 
 in thi dull world , which in thi absenc is 
 no better than a sti ? o , see , my women , [ antoni die ] 
 the crown o ' th ' earth doth melt . my lord ! 
 o , wither 'd is the garland of the war , 
 the soldier 's pole is fall'n ! young boy and girl 
 are level now with men . the odd is gone , 
 and there is noth left remark 
 beneath the visit moon . [ swoon ] 
 charmian . o , quiet , ladi ! 
 ira . she 's dead too , our sovereign . 
 charmian . ladi ! 
 ira . madam ! 
 charmian . o madam , madam , madam ! 
 ira . royal egypt , empress ! 
 charmian . peac , peac , ira ! 
 cleopatra . no more but e'en a woman , and command 
 by such poor passion as the maid that milk 
 and doe the meanest chare . it were for me 
 to throw my sceptr at the injuri god ; 
 to tell them that thi world did equal their 
 till they had stol'n our jewel . all 's but nought ; 
 patienc is sottish , and impati doe 
 becom a dog that 's mad . then is it sin 
 to rush into the secret hous of death 
 ere death dare come to us ? how do you , women ? 
 what , what ! good cheer ! whi , how now , charmian ! 
 my nobl girl ! ah , women , women , look , 
 our lamp is spent , it 's out ! good sir , take heart . 
 we 'll buri him ; and then , what 's brave , what 's nobl , 
 let 's do it after the high roman fashion , 
 and make death proud to take us . come , away ; 
 thi case of that huge spirit now is cold . 
 ah , women , women ! come ; we have no friend 
 but resolut and the briefest end . 
 exeunt ; those abov hear off antoni 's bodi 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 act v. scene i . 
 alexandria . caesar 's camp 
 
 enter caesar , agrippa , dolabella , maecena , gallu , 
 proculeiu , and other , hi council of war 
 
 caesar . go to him , dolabella , bid him yield ; 
 be so frustrat , tell him he mock 
 the paus that he make . 
 dolabella . caesar , i shall . exit 
 
 enter derceta with the sword of antoni 
 
 caesar . wherefor is that ? and what art thou that dar'st 
 appear thu to us ? 
 derceta . i am call 'd derceta ; 
 mark antoni i serv 'd , who best wa worthi 
 best to be serv 'd . whilst he stood up and spoke , 
 he wa my master , and i wore my life 
 to spend upon hi hater . if thou pleas 
 to take me to thee , as i wa to him 
 i 'll be to caesar ; if thou pleasest not , 
 i yield thee up my life . 
 caesar . what is't thou say'st ? 
 derceta . i say , o caesar , antoni is dead . 
 caesar . the break of so great a thing should make 
 a greater crack . the round world 
 should have shook lion into civil street , 
 and citizen to their den . the death of antoni 
 is not a singl doom ; in the name lay 
 a moieti of the world . 
 derceta . he is dead , caesar , 
 not by a public minist of justic , 
 nor by a hire knife ; but that self hand 
 which writ hi honour in the act it did 
 hath , with the courag which the heart did lend it , 
 split the heart . thi is hi sword ; 
 i robb 'd hi wound of it ; behold it stain 'd 
 with hi most nobl blood . 
 caesar . look you sad , friend ? 
 the god rebuk me , but it is tide 
 to wash the eye of king . 
 agrippa . and strang it is 
 that natur must compel us to lament 
 our most persist deed . 
 maecena . hi taint and honour 
 wag 'd equal with him . 
 agrippa . a rarer spirit never 
 did steer human . but you god will give us 
 some fault to make us men . caesar is touch 'd . 
 maecena . when such a spaciou mirror 's set befor him , 
 he need must see himself . 
 caesar . o antoni , 
 i have follow 'd thee to thi ! but we do lanc 
 diseas in our bodi . i must perforc 
 have shown to thee such a declin day 
 or look on thine ; we could not stall togeth 
 in the whole world . but yet let me lament , 
 with tear as sovereign as the blood of heart , 
 that thou , my brother , my competitor 
 in top of all design , my mate in empir , 
 friend and companion in the front of war , 
 the arm of mine own bodi , and the heart 
 where mine hi thought did kindle- that our star , 
 unreconcili , should divid 
 our equal to thi . hear me , good friends- 
 
 enter an egyptian 
 
 but i will tell you at some meeter season . 
 the busi of thi man look out of him ; 
 we 'll hear him what he say . whenc are you ? 
 egyptian . a poor egyptian , yet the queen , my mistress , 
 confin 'd in all she ha , her monument , 
 of thi intent desir instruct , 
 that she preparedli may frame herself 
 to th ' way she 's forc 'd to . 
 caesar . bid her have good heart . 
 she soon shall know of us , by some of our , 
 how honour and how kindli we 
 determin for her ; for caesar can not learn 
 to be ungentl . 
 egyptian . so the god preserv thee ! exit 
 caesar . come hither , proculeiu . go and say 
 we purpos her no shame . give her what comfort 
 the qualiti of her passion shall requir , 
 lest , in her great , by some mortal stroke 
 she do defeat us ; for her life in rome 
 would be etern in our triumph . go , 
 and with your speediest bring us what she say , 
 and how you find her . 
 proculeiu . caesar , i shall . exit 
 caesar . gallu , go you along . exit gallu 
 where 's dolabella , to second proculeiu ? 
 all . dolabella ! 
 caesar . let him alon , for i rememb now 
 how he 's employ 'd ; he shall in time be readi . 
 go with me to my tent , where you shall see 
 how hardli i wa drawn into thi war , 
 how calm and gentl i proceed still 
 in all my write . go with me , and see 
 what i can show in thi . exeunt 
 
 act_ < num > |sc_ < num > 
 scene ii . 
 alexandria . the monument 
 
 enter cleopatra , charmian , ira , and mardian 
 
 cleopatra . my desol doe begin to make 
 a better life . 't is paltri to be caesar : 
 not be fortun , he 's but fortun 's knave , 
 a minist of her will ; and it is great 
 to do that thing that end all other deed , 
 which shackl accid and bolt up chang , 
 which sleep , and never palat more the dug , 
 the beggar 's nurs and caesar 's . 
 
 enter , to the gate of the monument , proculeiu , gallu , 
 and soldier 
 
 proculeiu . caesar send greet to the queen of egypt , 
 and bid thee studi on what fair demand 
 thou mean'st to have him grant thee . 
 cleopatra . what 's thi name ? 
 proculeiu . my name is proculeiu . 
 cleopatra . antoni 
 did tell me of you , bade me trust you ; but 
 i do not greatli care to be deceiv 'd , 
 that have no use for trust . if your master 
 would have a queen hi beggar , you must tell him 
 that majesti , to keep decorum , must 
 no less beg than a kingdom . if he pleas 
 to give me conquer 'd egypt for my son , 
 he give me so much of mine own as i 
 will kneel to him with thank . 
 proculeiu . be of good cheer ; 
 y'are fall'n into a princ hand ; fear noth . 
 make your full refer freeli to my lord , 
 who is so full of grace that it flow over 
 on all that need . let me report to him 
 your sweet depend , and you shall find 
 a conqueror that will pray in aid for kind 
 where he for grace is kneel 'd to . 
 cleopatra . pray you tell him 
 i am hi fortun 's vassal and i send him 
 the great he ha got . i hourli learn 
 a doctrin of obedi , and would gladli 
 look him i ' th ' face . 
 proculeiu . thi i 'll report , dear ladi . 
 have comfort , for i know your plight is piti 
 of him that cau 'd it . 
 gallu . you see how easili she may be surpri 'd . 
 
 here proculeiu and two of the guard ascend the 
 monument by a ladder place against a window , 
 and come behind cleopatra . some of the guard 
 unbar and open the gate 
 
 guard her till caesar come . exit 
 ira . royal queen ! 
 charmian . o cleopatra ! thou art taken , queen ! 
 cleopatra . quick , quick , good hand . [ draw a dagger ] 
 proculeiu . hold , worthi ladi , hold , [ disarm her ] 
 do not yourself such wrong , who are in thi 
 reliev 'd , but not betray 'd . 
 cleopatra . what , of death too , 
 that rid our dog of languish ? 
 proculeiu . cleopatra , 
 do not abus my master 's bounti by 
 th ' undo of yourself . let the world see 
 hi nobl well act , which your death 
 will never let come forth . 
 cleopatra . where art thou , death ? 
 come hither , come ! come , come , and take a queen 
 worth mani babe and beggar ! 
 proculeiu . o , temper , ladi ! 
 cleopatra . sir , i will eat no meat ; i 'll not drink , sir ; 
 if idl talk will onc be necessari , 
 i 'll not sleep neither . thi mortal hous i 'll ruin , 
 do caesar what he can . know , sir , that i 
 will not wait pinion 'd at your master 's court , 
 nor onc be chasti 'd with the sober eye 
 of dull octavia . shall they hoist me up , 
 and show me to the shout varletri 
 of censur rome ? rather a ditch in egypt 
 be gentl grave unto me ! rather on nilu ' mud 
 lay me stark-nak 'd , and let the water-fli 
 blow me into abhor ! rather make 
 my countri 's high pyramid my gibbet , 
 and hang me up in chain ! 
 proculeiu . you do extend 
 these thought of horror further than you shall 
 find caus in caesar . 
 
 enter dolabella 
 
 dolabella . proculeiu , 
 what thou hast done thi master caesar know , 
 and he hath sent for thee . for the queen , 
 i 'll take her to my guard . 
 proculeiu . so , dolabella , 
 it shall content me best . be gentl to her . 
 [ to cleopatra ] to caesar i will speak what you shall pleas , 
 if you 'll employ me to him . 
 cleopatra . say i would die . 
 exeunt proculeiu and soldier 
 dolabella . most nobl empress , you have heard of me ? 
 cleopatra . i can not tell . 
 dolabella . assuredli you know me . 
 cleopatra . no matter , sir , what i have heard or known . 
 you laugh when boy or women tell their dream ; 
 is't not your trick ? 
 dolabella . i understand not , madam . 
 cleopatra . i dreamt there wa an emperor antony- 
 o , such anoth sleep , that i might see 
 but such anoth man ! 
 dolabella . if it might pleas ye- 
 cleopatra . hi face wa as the heav'n , and therein stuck 
 a sun and moon , which kept their cours and light 
 the littl o , the earth . 
 dolabella . most sovereign creature- 
 cleopatra . hi leg bestrid the ocean ; hi rear 'd arm 
 crest the world . hi voic wa properti 
 as all the tune sphere , and that to friend ; 
 but when he meant to quail and shake the orb , 
 he wa as rattl thunder . for hi bounti , 
 there wa no winter i n't ; an autumn 't wa 
 that grew the more by reap . hi delight 
 were dolphin-lik : they show 'd hi back abov 
 the element they liv 'd in . in hi liveri 
 walk 'd crown and crownet ; realm and island were 
 as plate dropp 'd from hi pocket . 
 dolabella . cleopatra- 
 cleopatra . think you there wa or might be such a man 
 as thi i dreamt of ? 
 dolabella . gentl madam , no . 
 cleopatra . you lie , up to the hear of the god . 
 but if there be nor ever were one such , 
 it 's past the size of drearn . natur want stuff 
 to vie strang form with fanci ; yet t ' imagin 
 an antoni were natur 's piec 'gainst fanci , 
 condemn shadow quit . 
 dolabella . hear me , good madam . 
 your loss is , as yourself , great ; and you bear it 
 as answer to the weight . would i might never 
 o'ertak pursu 'd success , but i do feel , 
 by the rebound of your , a grief that smite 
 my veri heart at root . 
 cleopatra . i thank you , sir . 
 know you what caesar mean to do with me ? 
 dolabella . i am loath to tell you what i would you knew . 
 cleopatra . nay , pray you , sir . 
 dolabella . though he be honourable- 
 cleopatra . he 'll lead me , then , in triumph ? 
 dolabella . madam , he will . i know't . [ flourish ] 
 [ within : 'make way there-caesar ! ' ] 
 
 enter caesar ; gallu , proculeiu , maecena , seleucu , 
 and other of hi train 
 
 caesar . which is the queen of egypt ? 
 dolabella . it is the emperor , madam . [ cleopatpa kneel ] 
 caesar . aris , you shall not kneel . 
 i pray you , rise ; rise , egypt . 
 cleopatra . sir , the god 
 will have it thu ; my master and my lord 
 i must obey . 
 caesar . take to you no hard thought . 
 the record of what injuri you did us , 
 though written in our flesh , we shall rememb 
 as thing but done by chanc . 
 cleopatra . sole sir o ' th ' world , 
 i can not project mine own caus so well 
 to make it clear , but do confess i have 
 been laden with like frailti which befor 
 have often sham 'd our sex . 
 caesar . cleopatra , know 
 we will extenu rather than enforc . 
 if you appli yourself to our intents- 
 which toward you are most gentle- you shall find 
 a benefit in thi chang ; but if you seek 
 to lay on me a cruelti by take 
 antoni 's cours , you shall bereav yourself 
 of my good purpos , and put your children 
 to that destruct which i 'll guard them from , 
 if thereon you reli . i 'll take my leav . 
 cleopatra . and may , through all the world . 't is your , and we , 
 your scutcheon and your sign of conquest , shall 
 hang in what place you pleas . here , my good lord . 
 caesar . you shall advis me in all for cleopatra . 
 cleopatra . thi is the brief of money , plate , and jewel , 
 i am possess 'd of . 't is exactli valu , 
 not petti thing admit . where 's seleucu ? 
 seleucu . here , madam . 
 cleopatra . thi is my treasur ; let him speak , my lord , 
 upon hi peril , that i have reserv 'd 
 to myself noth . speak the truth , seleucu . 
 seleucu . madam , 
 i had rather seal my lip than to my peril 
 speak that which is not . 
 cleopatra . what have i kept back ? 
 seleucu . enough to purchas what you have made known . 
 caesar . nay , blush not , cleopatra ; i approv 
 your wisdom in the deed . 
 cleopatra . see , caesar ! o , behold , 
 how pomp is follow ! mine will now be your ; 
 and , should we shift estat , your would be mine . 
 the ingratitud of thi seleucu doe 
 even make me wild . o slave , of no more trust 
 than love that 's hir 'd ! what , goest thou back ? thou shalt 
 go back , i warrant thee ; but i 'll catch thine eye 
 though they had wing . slave , soulless villain , dog ! 
 o rare base ! 
 caesar . good queen , let us entreat you . 
 cleopatra . o caesar , what a wound shame is thi , 
 that thou vouchsaf here to visit me , 
 do the honour of thi lordli 
 to one so meek , that mine own servant should 
 parcel the sum of my disgrac by 
 addit of hi envi ! say , good caesar , 
 that i some ladi trifl have reserv 'd , 
 immoment toy , thing of such digniti 
 as we greet modern friend withal ; and say 
 some nobler token i have kept apart 
 for livia and octavia , to induc 
 their mediation- must i be unfold 
 with one that i have bred ? the god ! it smite me 
 beneath the fall i have . [ to seleucu ] prithe go henc ; 
 or i shall show the cinder of my spirit 
 through th ' ash of my chanc . wert thou a man , 
 thou wouldst have merci on me . 
 caesar . forbear , seleucu . exit seleucu 
 cleopatra . be it known that we , the greatest , are misthought 
 for thing that other do ; and when we fall 
 we answer other ' merit in our name , 
 are therefor to be piti . 
 caesar . cleopatra , 
 not what you have reserv 'd , nor what acknowledg 'd , 
 put we i ' th ' roll of conquest . still be't your , 
 bestow it at your pleasur ; and believ 
 caesar 's no merchant , to make prize with you 
 of thing that merchant sold . therefor be cheer 'd ; 
 make not your thought your prison . no , dear queen ; 
 for we intend so to dispos you as 
 yourself shall give us counsel . feed and sleep . 
 our care and piti is so much upon you 
 that we remain your friend ; and so , adieu . 
 cleopatra . my master and my lord ! 
 caesar . not so . adieu . 
 flourish . exeunt caesar and hi train 
 cleopatra . he word me , girl , he word me , that i should not 
 be nobl to myself . but hark thee , charmian ! 
 [ whisper charmian ] 
 ira . finish , good ladi ; the bright day is done , 
 and we are for the dark . 
 cleopatra . hie thee again . 
 i have spoke alreadi , and it is provid ; 
 go put it to the hast . 
 charmian . madam , i will . 
 
 re-ent dolabella 
 
 dolabella . where 's the queen ? 
 charmian . behold , sir . exit 
 cleopatra . dolabella ! 
 dolabella . madam , as thereto sworn by your command , 
 which my love make religion to obey , 
 i tell you thi : caesar through syria 
 intend hi journey , and within three day 
 you with your children will he send befor . 
 make your best use of thi ; i have perform 'd 
 your pleasur and my promis . 
 cleopatra . dolabella , 
 i shall remain your debtor . 
 dolabella . i your servant . 
 adieu , good queen ; i must attend on caesar . 
 cleopatra . farewel , and thank . exit dolabella 
 now , ira , what think'st thou ? 
 thou an egyptian puppet shall be shown 
 in rome as well as i. mechan slave , 
 with greasi apron , rule , and hammer , shall 
 uplift us to the view ; in their thick breath , 
 rank of gross diet , shall we be encloud , 
 and forc 'd to drink their vapour . 
 ira . the god forbid ! 
 cleopatra . nay , 't is most certain , ira . sauci lictor 
 will catch at us like strumpet , and scald rhymer 
 ballad us out o ' tune ; the quick comedian 
 extempor will stage us , and present 
 our alexandrian revel ; antoni 
 shall be brought drunken forth , and i shall see 
 some squeak cleopatra boy my great 
 i ' th ' postur of a whore . 
 ira . o the good god ! 
 cleopatra . nay , that 's certain . 
 ira . i 'll never see't , for i am sure mine nail 
 are stronger than mine eye . 
 cleopatra . whi , that 's the way 
 to fool their prepar and to conquer 
 their most absurd intent . 
 
 enter charmian 
 
 now , charmian ! 
 show me , my women , like a queen . go fetch 
 my best attir . i am again for cydnu , 
 to meet mark antoni . sirrah , ira , go . 
 now , nobl charmian , we 'll dispatch inde ; 
 and when thou hast done thi chare , i 'll give thee leav 
 to play till doomsday . bring our crown and all . 
 exit ira . a nois within 
 wherefor 's thi nois ? 
 
 enter a guardsman 
 
 guardsman . here is a rural fellow 
 that will not be deni your high ' presenc . 
 he bring you fig . 
 cleopatra . let him come in . exit guardsman 
 what poor an instrument 
 may do a nobl deed ! he bring me liberti . 
 my resolut 's plac 'd , and i have noth 
 of woman in me . now from head to foot 
 i am marble-const ; now the fleet moon 
 no planet is of mine . 
 
 re-ent guardsman and clown , with a basket 
 
 guardsman . thi is the man . 
 cleopatra . avoid , and leav him . exit guardsman 
 hast thou the pretti worm of nilu there 
 that kill and pain not ? 
 clown . truli , i have him . but i would not be the parti that should 
 desir you to touch him , for hi bite is immort ; those that 
 do die of it do seldom or never recov . 
 cleopatra . remember'st thou ani that have die o n't ? 
 clown . veri mani , men and women too . i heard of one of them no 
 longer than yesterday : a veri honest woman , but someth given 
 to lie , as a woman should not do but in the way of honesti ; how 
 she die of the bite of it , what pain she felt- truli she make 
 a veri good report o ' th ' worm . but he that will believ all that 
 they say shall never be save by half that they do . but thi is 
 most falliabl , the worm 's an odd worm . 
 cleopatra . get thee henc ; farewel . 
 clown . i wish you all joy of the worm . 
 [ set down the basket ] 
 cleopatra . farewel . 
 clown . you must think thi , look you , that the worm will do hi 
 kind . 
 cleopatra . ay , ay ; farewel . 
 clown . look you , the worm is not to be trust but in the keep 
 of wise peopl ; for inde there is no good in the worm . 
 cleopatra . take thou no care ; it shall be heed . 
 clown . veri good . give it noth , i pray you , for it is not worth 
 the feed . 
 cleopatra . will it eat me ? 
 clown . you must not think i am so simpl but i know the devil 
 himself will not eat a woman . i know that a woman is a dish for 
 the god , if the devil dress her not . but truli , these same 
 whoreson devil do the god great harm in their women , for in 
 everi ten that they make the devil mar five . 
 cleopatra . well , get thee gone ; farewel . 
 clown . ye , forsooth . i wish you joy o ' th ' worm . exit 
 
 re-ent ira , with a robe , crown , & c. 
 
 cleopatra . give me my robe , put on my crown ; i have 
 immort long in me . now no more 
 the juic of egypt 's grape shall moist thi lip . 
 yare , yare , good ira ; quick . methink i hear 
 antoni call . i see him rous himself 
 to prais my nobl act . i hear him mock 
 the luck of caesar , which the god give men 
 to excus their after wrath . husband , i come . 
 now to that name my courag prove my titl ! 
 i am fire and air ; my other element 
 i give to baser life . so , have you done ? 
 come then , and take the last warmth of my lip . 
 farewel , kind charmian . ira , long farewel . 
 [ kiss them . ira fall and die ] 
 have i the aspic in my lip ? dost fall ? 
 if thu thou and natur can so gentli part , 
 the stroke of death is as a lover 's pinch , 
 which hurt and is desir 'd . dost thou lie still ? 
 if thou vanishest , thou tell'st the world 
 it is not worth leave-tak . 
 charmian . dissolv , thick cloud , and rain , that i may say 
 the god themselv do weep . 
 cleopatra . thi prove me base . 
 if she first meet the curl antoni , 
 he 'll make demand of her , and spend that kiss 
 which is my heaven to have . come , thou mortal wretch , 
 [ to an asp , which she appli to her breast ] 
 with thi sharp teeth thi knot intrins 
 of life at onc unti . poor venom fool , 
 be angri and dispatch . o couldst thou speak , 
 that i might hear thee call great caesar ass 
 unpolici ! 
 charmian . o eastern star ! 
 cleopatra . peac , peac ! 
 dost thou not see my babi at my breast 
 that suck the nurs asleep ? 
 charmian . o , break ! o , break ! 
 cleopatra . as sweet as balm , as soft as air , as gentle- 
 o antoni ! nay , i will take thee too : 
 [ appli anoth asp to her arm ] 
 what should i stay- [ die ] 
 charmian . in thi vile world ? so , fare thee well . 
 now boast thee , death , in thi possess lie 
 a lass unparallel 'd . downi window , close ; 
 and golden phoebu never be beheld 
 of eye again so royal ! your crown 's awri ; 
 i 'll mend it and then play- 
 
 enter the guard , rush in 
 
 first guard . where 's the queen ? 
 charmian . speak softli , wake her not . 
 first guard . caesar hath sent- 
 charmian . too slow a messeng . [ appli an asp ] 
 o , come apac , dispatch . i partli feel thee . 
 first guard . approach , ho ! all 's not well : caesar 's beguil 'd . 
 second guard . there 's dolabella sent from caesar ; call him . 
 first guard . what work is here ! charmian , is thi well done ? 
 charmian . it is well done , and fit for a princ 
 descend of so mani royal king . 
 ah , soldier ! [ charmian die ] 
 
 re-ent dolabella 
 
 dolabella . how goe it here ? 
 second guard . all dead . 
 dolabella . caesar , thi thought 
 touch their effect in thi . thyself art come 
 to see perform 'd the dread act which thou 
 so sought'st to hinder . 
 [ within : ' a way there , a way for caesar ! ' ] 
 
 re-ent caesar and all hi train 
 
 dolabella . o sir , you are too sure an augur : 
 that you did fear is done . 
 caesar . bravest at the last , 
 she level 'd at our purpos , and be royal , 
 took her own way . the manner of their death ? 
 i do not see them bleed . 
 dolabella . who wa last with them ? 
 first guard . a simpl countryman that brought her fig . 
 thi wa hi basket . 
 caesar . poison 'd then . 
 first guard . o caesar , 
 thi charmian liv 'd but now ; she stood and spake . 
 i found her trim up the diadem 
 on her dead mistress . tremblingli she stood , 
 and on the sudden dropp 'd . 
 caesar . o nobl weak ! 
 if they had swallow 'd poison 'twould appear 
 by extern swell ; but she look like sleep , 
 as she would catch anoth antoni 
 in her strong toil of grace . 
 dolabella . here on her breast 
 there is a vent of blood , and someth blown ; 
 the like is on her arm . 
 first guard . thi is an aspic 's trail ; and these fig-leav 
 have slime upon them , such as th ' aspic leav 
 upon the cave of nile . 
 caesar . most probabl 
 that so she die ; for her physician tell me 
 she hath pursu 'd conclus infinit 
 of easi way to die . take up her bed , 
 and bear her women from the monument . 
 she shall be buri by her antoni ; 
 no grave upon the earth shall clip in it 
 a pair so famou . high event as these 
 strike those that make them ; and their stori is 
 no less in piti than hi glori which 
 brought them to be lament . our armi shall 
 in solemn show attend thi funer , 
 and then to rome . come , dolabella , see 
 high order in thi great solemn . exeunt 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 as you like it 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona . 
 
 duke , live in exil 
 frederick , hi brother , and usurp of hi dominion 
 amien , lord attend on the banish duke 
 jaqu , `` `` `` `` `` `` 
 le beau , a courtier attend upon frederick 
 charl , wrestler to frederick 
 oliv , son of sir rowland de boy 
 jaqu , `` `` `` `` `` `` 
 orlando , `` `` `` `` `` `` 
 adam , servant to oliv 
 denni , `` `` `` 
 touchston , the court jester 
 sir oliv martext , a vicar 
 corin , shepherd 
 silviu , `` 
 william , a countri fellow , in love with audrey 
 a person repres hymen 
 
 rosalind , daughter to the banish duke 
 celia , daughter to frederick 
 phebe , a shepherd 
 audrey , a countri wench 
 
 lord , page , forest , and attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 oliv 's hous ; frederick 's court ; and the forest of arden 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 orchard of oliv 's hous 
 
 enter orlando and adam 
 
 orlando . as i rememb , adam , it wa upon thi fashion bequeath 
 me by will but poor a thousand crown , and , as thou say'st , 
 charg my brother , on hi bless , to breed me well ; and there 
 begin my sad . my brother jaqu he keep at school , and 
 report speak goldenli of hi profit . for my part , he keep me 
 rustic at home , or , to speak more properli , stay me here at 
 home unkept ; for call you that keep for a gentleman of my 
 birth that differ not from the stall of an ox ? hi hors are 
 bred better ; for , besid that they are fair with their feed , 
 they are taught their manag , and to that end rider dearli 
 hir 'd ; but i , hi brother , gain noth under him but growth ; for 
 the which hi anim on hi dunghil are as much bound to him 
 as i. besid thi noth that he so plenti give me , the 
 someth that natur gave me hi counten seem to take from 
 me . he let me feed with hi hind , bar me the place of a 
 brother , and as much as in him lie , mine my gentil with my 
 educ . thi is it , adam , that griev me ; and the spirit of 
 my father , which i think is within me , begin to mutini against 
 thi servitud . i will no longer endur it , though yet i know no 
 wise remedi how to avoid it . 
 
 enter oliv 
 
 adam . yonder come my master , your brother . 
 orlando . go apart , adam , and thou shalt hear how he will shake me 
 up . [ adam retir ] 
 oliv . now , sir ! what make you here ? 
 orlando . noth ; i am not taught to make ani thing . 
 oliv . what mar you then , sir ? 
 orlando . marri , sir , i am help you to mar that which god made , a 
 poor unworthi brother of your , with idl . 
 oliv . marri , sir , be better employ , and be nought awhil . 
 orlando . shall i keep your hog , and eat husk with them ? what 
 prodig portion have i spent that i should come to such penuri ? 
 oliv . know you where you are , sir ? 
 orlando . o , sir , veri well ; here in your orchard . 
 oliv . know you befor whom , sir ? 
 orlando . ay , better than him i am befor know me . i know you are 
 my eldest brother ; and in the gentl condit of blood , you 
 should so know me . the courtesi of nation allow you my better 
 in that you are the first-born ; but the same tradit take not 
 away my blood , were there twenti brother betwixt us . i have as 
 much of my father in me as you , albeit i confess your come 
 befor me is nearer to hi rever . 
 oliv . what , boy ! [ strike him ] 
 orlando . come , come , elder brother , you are too young in thi . 
 oliv . wilt thou lay hand on me , villain ? 
 orlando . i am no villain ; i am the youngest son of sir rowland de 
 boy . he wa my father ; and he is thrice a villain that say such 
 a father begot villain . wert thou not my brother , i would not 
 take thi hand from thi throat till thi other had pull 'd out thi 
 tongu for say so . thou ha rail 'd on thyself . 
 adam . [ come forward ] sweet master , be patient ; for your father 's 
 remembr , be at accord . 
 oliv . let me go , i say . 
 orlando . i will not , till i pleas ; you shall hear me . my father 
 charg 'd you in hi will to give me good educ : you have 
 train 'd me like a peasant , obscur and hide from me all 
 gentleman-lik qualiti . the spirit of my father grow strong in 
 me , and i will no longer endur it ; therefor allow me such 
 exercis as may becom a gentleman , or give me the poor 
 allotteri my father left me by testament ; with that i will go buy 
 my fortun . 
 oliv . and what wilt thou do ? beg , when that is spent ? well , sir , 
 get you in . i will not long be troubl with you ; you shall have 
 some part of your will . i pray you leav me . 
 orlando . i no further offend you than becom me for my good . 
 oliv . get you with him , you old dog . 
 adam . is 'old dog ' my reward ? most true , i have lost my teeth in 
 your servic . god be with my old master ! he would not have spoke 
 such a word . 
 exeunt orlando and adam 
 oliv . is it even so ? begin you to grow upon me ? i will physic 
 your rank , and yet give no thousand crown neither . holla , 
 denni ! 
 
 enter denni 
 
 denni . call your worship ? 
 oliv . not charl , the duke 's wrestler , here to speak with me ? 
 denni . so pleas you , he is here at the door and importun access 
 to you . 
 oliv . call him in . [ exit denni ] 'twill be a good way ; and 
 to-morrow the wrestl is . 
 
 enter charl 
 
 charl . good morrow to your worship . 
 oliv . good monsieur charl ! what 's the new news at the new 
 court ? 
 charl . there 's no news at the court , sir , but the old news ; that 
 is , the old duke is banish by hi younger brother the new duke ; 
 and three or four love lord have put themselv into voluntari 
 exil with him , whose land and revenu enrich the new duke ; 
 therefor he give them good leav to wander . 
 oliv . can you tell if rosalind , the duke 's daughter , be banish 
 with her father ? 
 charl . o , no ; for the duke 's daughter , her cousin , so love her , 
 be ever from their cradl bred togeth , that she would have 
 follow her exil , or have die to stay behind her . she is at 
 the court , and no less belov of her uncl than hi own 
 daughter ; and never two ladi love as they do . 
 oliv . where will the old duke live ? 
 charl . they say he is alreadi in the forest of arden , and a mani 
 merri men with him ; and there they live like the old robin hood 
 of england . they say mani young gentlemen flock to him everi day , 
 and fleet the time carelessli , as they did in the golden world . 
 oliv . what , you wrestl to-morrow befor the new duke ? 
 charl . marri , do i , sir ; and i came to acquaint you with a 
 matter . i am given , sir , secretli to understand that your younger 
 brother , orlando , hath a disposit to come in disgui 'd against 
 me to tri a fall . to-morrow , sir , i wrestl for my credit ; and he 
 that escap me without some broken limb shall acquit him well . 
 your brother is but young and tender ; and , for your love , i would 
 be loath to foil him , as i must , for my own honour , if he come 
 in ; therefor , out of my love to you , i came hither to acquaint 
 you withal , that either you might stay him from hi intend , 
 or brook such disgrac well as he shall run into , in that it is 
 thing of hi own search and altogeth against my will . 
 oliv . charl , i thank thee for thi love to me , which thou shalt 
 find i will most kindli requit . i had myself notic of my 
 brother 's purpos herein , and have by underhand mean labour to 
 dissuad him from it ; but he is resolut . i 'll tell thee , 
 charl , it is the stubbornest young fellow of franc ; full of 
 ambit , an enviou emul of everi man 's good part , a secret 
 and villain contriv against me hi natur brother . 
 therefor use thi discret : i had as lief thou didst break hi 
 neck as hi finger . and thou wert best look to't ; for if thou 
 dost him ani slight disgrac , or if he do not mightili grace 
 himself on thee , he will practis against thee by poison , entrap 
 thee by some treacher devic , and never leav thee till he 
 hath ta'en thi life by some indirect mean or other ; for , i 
 assur thee , and almost with tear i speak it , there is not one 
 so young and so villain thi day live . i speak but brotherli 
 of him ; but should i anatom him to thee as he is , i must blush 
 and weep , and thou must look pale and wonder . 
 charl . i am heartili glad i came hither to you . if he come 
 to-morrow i 'll give him hi payment . if ever he go alon again , 
 i 'll never wrestl for prize more . and so , god keep your worship ! 
 exit 
 oliv . farewel , good charl . now will i stir thi gamest . i 
 hope i shall see an end of him ; for my soul , yet i know not whi , 
 hate noth more than he . yet he 's gentl ; never school 'd and 
 yet learn ; full of nobl devic ; of all sort enchantingli 
 belov ; and , inde , so much in the heart of the world , and 
 especi of my own peopl , who best know him , that i am 
 altogeth mispris . but it shall not be so long ; thi wrestler 
 shall clear all . noth remain but that i kindl the boy 
 thither , which now i 'll go about . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a lawn befor the duke 's palac 
 
 enter rosalind and celia 
 
 celia . i pray thee , rosalind , sweet my coz , be merri . 
 rosalind . dear celia , i show more mirth than i am mistress of ; and 
 would you yet i were merrier ? unless you could teach me to forget 
 a banish father , you must not learn me how to rememb ani 
 extraordinari pleasur . 
 celia . herein i see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that i 
 love thee . if my uncl , thi banish father , had banish thi 
 uncl , the duke my father , so thou hadst been still with me , i 
 could have taught my love to take thi father for mine ; so wouldst 
 thou , if the truth of thi love to me were so righteous temper 'd 
 as mine is to thee . 
 rosalind . well , i will forget the condit of my estat , to 
 rejoic in your . 
 celia . you know my father hath no child but i , nor none is like to 
 have ; and , truli , when he die thou shalt be hi heir ; for what 
 he hath taken away from thi father perforc , i will render thee 
 again in affect . by mine honour , i will ; and when i break that 
 oath , let me turn monster ; therefor , my sweet rose , my dear 
 rose , be merri . 
 rosalind . from henceforth i will , coz , and devis sport . 
 let me see ; what think you of fall in love ? 
 celia . marri , i prithe , do , to make sport withal ; but love no man 
 in good earnest , nor no further in sport neither than with safeti 
 of a pure blush thou mayst in honour come off again . 
 rosalind . what shall be our sport , then ? 
 celia . let us sit and mock the good housewif fortun from her 
 wheel , that her gift may henceforth be bestow equal . 
 rosalind . i would we could do so ; for her benefit are mightili 
 misplac ; and the bounti blind woman doth most mistak in her 
 gift to women . 
 celia . 't is true ; for those that she make fair she scarc make 
 honest ; and those that she make honest she make veri 
 ill-favouredli . 
 rosalind . nay ; now thou goest from fortun 's offic to natur 's : 
 fortun reign in gift of the world , not in the lineament of 
 natur . 
 
 enter touchston 
 
 celia . no ; when natur hath made a fair creatur , may she not by 
 fortun fall into the fire ? though natur hath given us wit to 
 flout at fortun , hath not fortun sent in thi fool to cut off 
 the argument ? 
 rosalind . inde , there is fortun too hard for natur , when 
 fortun make natur 's natur the cutter-off of natur 's wit . 
 celia . peradventur thi is not fortun 's work neither , but 
 natur 's , who perceiveth our natur wit too dull to reason of 
 such goddess , and hath sent thi natur for our whetston ; for 
 alway the dull of the fool is the whetston of the wit . how 
 now , wit ! whither wander you ? 
 touchston . mistress , you must come away to your father . 
 celia . were you made the messeng ? 
 touchston . no , by mine honour ; but i wa bid to come for you . 
 rosalind . where learn you that oath , fool ? 
 touchston . of a certain knight that swore by hi honour they were 
 good pancak , and swore by hi honour the mustard wa naught . 
 now i 'll stand to it , the pancak were naught and the mustard 
 wa good , and yet wa not the knight forsworn . 
 celia . how prove you that , in the great heap of your knowledg ? 
 rosalind . ay , marri , now unmuzzl your wisdom . 
 touchston . stand you both forth now : stroke your chin , and swear 
 by your beard that i am a knave . 
 celia . by our beard , if we had them , thou art . 
 touchston . by my knaveri , if i had it , then i were . but if you 
 swear by that that not , you are not forsworn ; no more wa thi 
 knight , swear by hi honour , for he never had ani ; or if he 
 had , he had sworn it away befor ever he saw those pancack or 
 that mustard . 
 celia . prithe , who is't that thou mean'st ? 
 touchston . one that old frederick , your father , love . 
 celia . my father 's love is enough to honour him . enough , speak no 
 more of him ; you 'll be whipt for taxat one of these day . 
 touchston . the more piti that fool may not speak wise what wise 
 men do foolishli . 
 celia . by my troth , thou sayest true ; for sinc the littl wit that 
 fool have wa silenc , the littl fooleri that wise men have 
 make a great show . here come monsieur le beau . 
 
 enter le beau 
 
 rosalind . with hi mouth full of news . 
 celia . which he will put on us as pigeon feed their young . 
 rosalind . then shall we be news-cramm 'd . 
 celia . all the better ; we shall be the more market . bon jour , 
 monsieur le beau . what 's the news ? 
 le beau . fair princess , you have lost much good sport . 
 celia . sport ! of what colour ? 
 le beau . what colour , madam ? how shall i answer you ? 
 rosalind . as wit and fortun will . 
 touchston . or as the destini decre . 
 celia . well said ; that wa laid on with a trowel . 
 touchston . nay , if i keep not my rank- 
 rosalind . thou losest thi old smell . 
 le beau . you amaz me , ladi . i would have told you of good 
 wrestl , which you have lost the sight of . 
 rosalind . yet tell us the manner of the wrestl . 
 le beau . i will tell you the begin , and , if it pleas your 
 ladyship , you may see the end ; for the best is yet to do ; and 
 here , where you are , they are come to perform it . 
 celia . well , the begin , that is dead and buri . 
 le beau . there come an old man and hi three sons- 
 celia . i could match thi begin with an old tale . 
 le beau . three proper young men , of excel growth and presenc . 
 rosalind . with bill on their neck : 'be it known unto all men by 
 these presents'- 
 le beau . the eldest of the three wrestl with charl , the duke 's 
 wrestler ; which charl in a moment threw him , and broke three of 
 hi rib , that there is littl hope of life in him . so he serv 'd 
 the second , and so the third . yonder they lie ; the poor old man , 
 their father , make such piti dole over them that all the 
 behold take hi part with weep . 
 rosalind . ala ! 
 touchston . but what is the sport , monsieur , that the ladi have 
 lost ? 
 le beau . whi , thi that i speak of . 
 touchston . thu men may grow wiser everi day . it is the first time 
 that ever i heard break of rib wa sport for ladi . 
 celia . or i , i promis thee . 
 rosalind . but is there ani els long to see thi broken music in 
 hi side ? is there yet anoth dote upon rib-break ? shall we 
 see thi wrestl , cousin ? 
 le beau . you must , if you stay here ; for here is the place 
 appoint for the wrestl , and they are readi to perform it . 
 celia . yonder , sure , they are come . let us now stay and see it . 
 
 flourish . enter duke frederick , lord , orlando , 
 charl , and attend 
 
 frederick . come on ; sinc the youth will not be entreat , hi own 
 peril on hi forward . 
 rosalind . is yonder the man ? 
 le beau . even he , madam . 
 celia . ala , he is too young ; yet he look success . 
 frederick . how now , daughter and cousin ! are you crept hither to 
 see the wrestl ? 
 rosalind . ay , my lieg ; so pleas you give us leav . 
 frederick . you will take littl delight in it , i can tell you , 
 there is such odd in the man . in piti of the challeng 's youth 
 i would fain dissuad him , but he will not be entreat . speak to 
 him , ladi ; see if you can move him . 
 celia . call him hither , good monsieur le beau . 
 frederick . do so ; i 'll not be by . 
 [ duke frederick goe apart ] 
 le beau . monsieur the challeng , the princess call for you . 
 orlando . i attend them with all respect and duti . 
 rosalind . young man , have you challeng 'd charl the wrestler ? 
 orlando . no , fair princess ; he is the gener challeng . i come 
 but in , as other do , to tri with him the strength of my youth . 
 celia . young gentleman , your spirit are too bold for your year . 
 you have seen cruel proof of thi man 's strength ; if you saw 
 yourself with your eye , or knew yourself with your judgment , the 
 fear of your adventur would counsel you to a more equal 
 enterpris . we pray you , for your own sake , to embrac your own 
 safeti and give over thi attempt . 
 rosalind . do , young sir ; your reput shall not therefor be 
 mispris : we will make it our suit to the duke that the 
 wrestl might not go forward . 
 orlando . i beseech you , punish me not with your hard thought , 
 wherein i confess me much guilti to deni so fair and excel 
 ladi ani thing . but let your fair eye and gentl wish go 
 with me to my trial ; wherein if i be foil 'd there is but one 
 sham 'd that wa never graciou ; if kill 'd , but one dead that is 
 will to be so . i shall do my friend no wrong , for i have none 
 to lament me ; the world no injuri , for in it i have noth ; onli 
 in the world i fill up a place , which may be better suppli when 
 i have made it empti . 
 rosalind . the littl strength that i have , i would it were with 
 you . 
 celia . and mine to eke out her . 
 rosalind . fare you well . pray heaven i be deceiv 'd in you ! 
 celia . your heart 's desir be with you ! 
 charl . come , where is thi young gallant that is so desir to 
 lie with hi mother earth ? 
 orlando . readi , sir ; but hi will hath in it a more modest work . 
 frederick . you shall tri but one fall . 
 charl . no , i warrant your grace , you shall not entreat him to a 
 second , that have so mightili persuad him from a first . 
 orlando . you mean to mock me after ; you should not have mock 'd me 
 befor ; but come your way . 
 rosalind . now , hercul be thi speed , young man ! 
 celia . i would i were invis , to catch the strong fellow by the 
 leg . [ they wrestl ] 
 rosalind . o excel young man ! 
 celia . if i had a thunderbolt in mine eye , i can tell who should 
 down . 
 [ charl is thrown . shout ] 
 frederick . no more , no more . 
 orlando . ye , i beseech your grace ; i am not yet well breath 'd . 
 frederick . how dost thou , charl ? 
 le beau . he can not speak , my lord . 
 frederick . bear him away . what is thi name , young man ? 
 orlando . orlando , my lieg ; the youngest son of sir rowland de 
 boy . 
 frederick . i would thou hadst been son to some man els . 
 the world esteem 'd thi father honour , 
 but i did find him still mine enemi . 
 thou shouldst have better plea 'd me with thi deed , 
 hadst thou descend from anoth hous . 
 but fare thee well ; thou art a gallant youth ; 
 i would thou hadst told me of anoth father . 
 exeunt duke , train , and le beau 
 celia . were i my father , coz , would i do thi ? 
 orlando . i am more proud to be sir rowland 's son , 
 hi youngest son- and would not chang that call 
 to be adopt heir to frederick . 
 rosalind . my father lov 'd sir rowland as hi soul , 
 and all the world wa of my father 's mind ; 
 had i befor known thi young man hi son , 
 i should have given him tear unto entreati 
 ere he should thu have ventur 'd . 
 celia . gentl cousin , 
 let us go thank him , and encourag him ; 
 my father 's rough and enviou disposit 
 stick me at heart . sir , you have well deserv 'd ; 
 if you do keep your promis in love 
 but justli as you have exceed all promis , 
 your mistress shall be happi . 
 rosalind . gentleman , [ give him a chain from her neck ] 
 wear thi for me ; one out of suit with fortun , 
 that could give more , but that her hand lack mean . 
 shall we go , coz ? 
 celia . ay . fare you well , fair gentleman . 
 orlando . can i not say ' i thank you ' ? my better part 
 are all thrown down ; and that which here stand up 
 is but a quintain , a mere lifeless block . 
 rosalind . he call us back . my pride fell with my fortun ; 
 i 'll ask him what he would . did you call , sir ? 
 sir , you have wrestl well , and overthrown 
 more than your enemi . 
 celia . will you go , coz ? 
 rosalind . have with you . fare you well . 
 exeunt rosalind and celia 
 orlando . what passion hang these weight upon my tongu ? 
 i can not speak to her , yet she urg 'd confer . 
 o poor orlando , thou art overthrown ! 
 or charl or someth weaker master thee . 
 
 re-ent le beau 
 
 le beau . good sir , i do in friendship counsel you 
 to leav thi place . albeit you have deserv 'd 
 high commend , true applaus , and love , 
 yet such is now the duke 's condit 
 that he misconstru all that you have done . 
 the duke is humor ; what he is , inde , 
 more suit you to conceiv than i to speak of . 
 orlando . i thank you , sir ; and pray you tell me thi : 
 which of the two wa daughter of the duke 
 that here wa at the wrestl ? 
 le beau . neither hi daughter , if we judg by manner ; 
 but yet , inde , the smaller is hi daughter ; 
 the other is daughter to the banish 'd duke , 
 and here detain 'd by her usurp uncl , 
 to keep hi daughter compani ; whose love 
 are dearer than the natur bond of sister . 
 but i can tell you that of late thi duke 
 hath ta'en displeasur 'gainst hi gentl niec , 
 ground upon no other argument 
 but that the peopl prais her for her virtu 
 and piti her for her good father 's sake ; 
 and , on my life , hi malic 'gainst the ladi 
 will suddenli break forth . sir , fare you well . 
 hereaft , in a better world than thi , 
 i shall desir more love and knowledg of you . 
 orlando . i rest much bounden to you ; fare you well . 
 exit le beau 
 thu must i from the smoke into the smother ; 
 from tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother . 
 but heavenli rosalind ! exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the duke 's palac 
 
 enter celia and rosalind 
 
 celia . whi , cousin ! whi , rosalind ! cupid have merci ! 
 not a word ? 
 rosalind . not one to throw at a dog . 
 celia . no , thi word are too preciou to be cast away upon cur ; 
 throw some of them at me ; come , lame me with reason . 
 rosalind . then there were two cousin laid up , when the one should 
 be lam 'd with reason and the other mad without ani . 
 celia . but is all thi for your father ? 
 rosalind . no , some of it is for my child 's father . o , how full of 
 brier is thi working-day world ! 
 celia . they are but bur , cousin , thrown upon thee in holiday 
 fooleri ; if we walk not in the trodden path , our veri petticoat 
 will catch them . 
 rosalind . i could shake them off my coat : these bur are in my 
 heart . 
 celia . hem them away . 
 rosalind . i would tri , if i could cri 'hem ' and have him . 
 celia . come , come , wrestl with thi affect . 
 rosalind . o , they take the part of a better wrestler than myself . 
 celia . o , a good wish upon you ! you will tri in time , in despit of 
 a fall . but , turn these jest out of servic , let us talk in 
 good earnest . is it possibl , on such a sudden , you should fall 
 into so strong a like with old sir rowland 's youngest son ? 
 rosalind . the duke my father lov 'd hi father dearli . 
 celia . doth it therefor ensu that you should love hi son dearli ? 
 by thi kind of chase i should hate him , for my father hate hi 
 father dearli ; yet i hate not orlando . 
 rosalind . no , faith , hate him not , for my sake . 
 celia . whi should i not ? doth he not deserv well ? 
 
 enter duke frederick , with lord 
 
 rosalind . let me love him for that ; and do you love him becaus i 
 do . look , here come the duke . 
 celia . with hi eye full of anger . 
 frederick . mistress , dispatch you with your safest hast , 
 and get you from our court . 
 rosalind . me , uncl ? 
 frederick . you , cousin . 
 within these ten day if that thou beest found 
 so near our public court as twenti mile , 
 thou diest for it . 
 rosalind . i do beseech your grace , 
 let me the knowledg of my fault bear with me . 
 if with myself i hold intellig , 
 or have acquaint with mine own desir ; 
 if that i do not dream , or be not frantic- 
 as i do trust i am not- then , dear uncl , 
 never so much as in a thought unborn 
 did i offend your high . 
 frederick . thu do all traitor ; 
 if their purgat did consist in word , 
 they are as innoc as grace itself . 
 let it suffic thee that i trust thee not . 
 rosalind . yet your mistrust can not make me a traitor . 
 tell me whereon the likelihood depend . 
 frederick . thou art thi father 's daughter ; there 's enough . 
 rosalind . so wa i when your high took hi dukedom ; 
 so wa i when your high banish 'd him . 
 treason is not inherit , my lord ; 
 or , if we did deriv it from our friend , 
 what 's that to me ? my father wa no traitor . 
 then , good my lieg , mistak me not so much 
 to think my poverti is treacher . 
 celia . dear sovereign , hear me speak . 
 frederick . ay , celia ; we stay 'd her for your sake , 
 els had she with her father rang 'd along . 
 celia . i did not then entreat to have her stay ; 
 it wa your pleasur , and your own remors ; 
 i wa too young that time to valu her , 
 but now i know her . if she be a traitor , 
 whi so am i : we still have slept togeth , 
 rose at an instant , learn 'd , play 'd , eat togeth ; 
 and wheresoe' we went , like juno 's swan , 
 still we went coupl and insepar . 
 frederick . she is too subtl for thee ; and her smooth , 
 her veri silenc and her patienc , 
 speak to the peopl , and they piti her . 
 thou art a fool . she rob thee of thi name ; 
 and thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuou 
 when she is gone . then open not thi lip . 
 firm and irrevoc is my doom 
 which i have pass 'd upon her ; she is banish 'd . 
 celia . pronounc that sentenc , then , on me , my lieg ; 
 i can not live out of her compani . 
 frederick . you are a fool . you , niec , provid yourself . 
 if you outstay the time , upon mine honour , 
 and in the great of my word , you die . 
 exeunt duke and lord 
 celia . o my poor rosalind ! whither wilt thou go ? 
 wilt thou chang father ? i will give thee mine . 
 i charg thee be not thou more griev 'd than i am . 
 rosalind . i have more caus . 
 celia . thou hast not , cousin . 
 prithe be cheer . know'st thou not the duke 
 hath banish 'd me , hi daughter ? 
 rosalind . that he hath not . 
 celia . no , hath not ? rosalind lack , then , the love 
 which teacheth thee that thou and i am one . 
 shall we be sund'r ? shall we part , sweet girl ? 
 no ; let my father seek anoth heir . 
 therefor devis with me how we may fli , 
 whither to go , and what to bear with us ; 
 and do not seek to take your charg upon you , 
 to bear your grief yourself , and leav me out ; 
 for , by thi heaven , now at our sorrow pale , 
 say what thou canst , i 'll go along with thee . 
 rosalind . whi , whither shall we go ? 
 celia . to seek my uncl in the forest of arden . 
 rosalind . ala , what danger will it be to us , 
 maid as we are , to travel forth so far ! 
 beauti provoketh thiev sooner than gold . 
 celia . i 'll put myself in poor and mean attir , 
 and with a kind of umber smirch my face ; 
 the like do you ; so shall we pass along , 
 and never stir assail . 
 rosalind . were it not better , 
 becaus that i am more than common tall , 
 that i did suit me all point like a man ? 
 a gallant curtle-ax upon my thigh , 
 a boar spear in my hand ; and- in my heart 
 lie there what hidden woman 's fear there will- 
 we 'll have a swash and a martial outsid , 
 as mani other mannish coward have 
 that do outfac it with their semblanc . 
 celia . what shall i call thee when thou art a man ? 
 rosalind . i 'll have no wors a name than jove 's own page , 
 and therefor look you call me ganymed . 
 but what will you be call 'd ? 
 celia . someth that hath a refer to my state : 
 no longer celia , but aliena . 
 rosalind . but , cousin , what if we assay 'd to steal 
 the clownish fool out of your father 's court ? 
 would he not be a comfort to our travel ? 
 celia . he 'll go along o'er the wide world with me ; 
 leav me alon to woo him . let 's away , 
 and get our jewel and our wealth togeth ; 
 devis the fittest time and safest way 
 to hide us from pursuit that will be made 
 after my flight . now go we in content 
 to liberti , and not to banish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 the forest of arden 
 
 enter duke senior , amien , and two or three lord , like forest 
 
 duke senior . now , my co-mat and brother in exil , 
 hath not old custom made thi life more sweet 
 than that of paint pomp ? are not these wood 
 more free from peril than the enviou court ? 
 here feel we not the penalti of adam , 
 the season ' differ ; as the ici fang 
 and churlish chide of the winter 's wind , 
 which when it bite and blow upon my bodi , 
 even till i shrink with cold , i smile and say 
 'thi is no flatteri ; these are counsellor 
 that feelingli persuad me what i am . ' 
 sweet are the use of advers , 
 which , like the toad , ugli and venom , 
 wear yet a preciou jewel in hi head ; 
 and thi our life , exempt from public haunt , 
 find tongu in tree , book in the run brook , 
 sermon in stone , and good in everyth . 
 i would not chang it . 
 amien . happi is your grace , 
 that can translat the stubborn of fortun 
 into so quiet and so sweet a style . 
 duke senior . come , shall we go and kill us venison ? 
 and yet it irk me the poor dappl fool , 
 be nativ burgher of thi desert citi , 
 should , in their own confin , with fork head 
 have their round haunch gor 'd . 
 first lord . inde , my lord , 
 the melancholi jaqu griev at that ; 
 and , in that kind , swear you do more usurp 
 than doth your brother that hath banish 'd you . 
 to-day my lord of amien and myself 
 did steal behind him as he lay along 
 under an oak whose antiqu root peep out 
 upon the brook that brawl along thi wood ! 
 to the which place a poor sequest'r stag , 
 that from the hunter 's aim had ta'en a hurt , 
 did come to languish ; and , inde , my lord , 
 the wretch anim heav 'd forth such groan 
 that their discharg did stretch hi leathern coat 
 almost to burst ; and the big round tear 
 cour 'd one anoth down hi innoc nose 
 in piteou chase ; and thu the hairi fool , 
 much mark of the melancholi jaqu , 
 stood on th ' extremest verg of the swift brook , 
 augment it with tear . 
 duke senior . but what said jaqu ? 
 did he not moral thi spectacl ? 
 first lord . o , ye , into a thousand simil . 
 first , for hi weep into the needless stream : 
 'poor deer , ' quoth he 'thou mak'st a testament 
 as worldl do , give thi sum of more 
 to that which had too much . ' then , be there alon , 
 left and abandon of hi velvet friend : 
 `` ti right ' ; quoth he 'thu miseri doth part 
 the flux of compani . ' anon , a careless herd , 
 full of the pastur , jump along by him 
 and never stay to greet him . 'ay , ' quoth jaqu 
 'sweep on , you fat and greasi citizen ; 
 't is just the fashion . wherefor do you look 
 upon that poor and broken bankrupt there ? ' 
 thu most invect he pierceth through 
 the bodi of the countri , citi , court , 
 yea , and of thi our life ; swear that we 
 are mere usurp , tyrant , and what 's wors , 
 to fright the anim , and to kill them up 
 in their assign 'd and nativ dwelling-plac . 
 duke senior . and did you leav him in thi contempl ? 
 second lord . we did , my lord , weep and comment 
 upon the sob deer . 
 duke senior . show me the place ; 
 i love to cope him in these sullen fit , 
 for then he 's full of matter . 
 first lord . i 'll bring you to him straight . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the duke 's palac 
 
 enter duke frederick , with lord 
 
 frederick . can it be possibl that no man saw them ? 
 it can not be ; some villain of my court 
 are of consent and suffer in thi . 
 first lord . i can not hear of ani that did see her . 
 the ladi , her attend of her chamber , 
 saw her abe , and in the morn earli 
 they found the bed untreasur 'd of their mistress . 
 second lord . my lord , the roynish clown , at whom so oft 
 your grace wa wont to laugh , is also miss . 
 hisperia , the princess ' gentlewoman , 
 confess that she secretli o'erheard 
 your daughter and her cousin much commend 
 the part and grace of the wrestler 
 that did but late foil the sinewi charl ; 
 and she believ , wherev they are gone , 
 that youth is sure in their compani . 
 frederick . send to hi brother ; fetch that gallant hither . 
 if he be absent , bring hi brother to me ; 
 i 'll make him find him . do thi suddenli ; 
 and let not search and inquisit quail 
 to bring again these foolish runaway . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 befor oliv 's hous 
 
 enter orlando and adam , meet 
 
 orlando . who 's there ? 
 adam . what , my young master ? o my gentl master ! 
 o my sweet master ! o you memori 
 of old sir rowland ! whi , what make you here ? 
 whi are you virtuou ? whi do peopl love you ? 
 and wherefor are you gentl , strong , and valiant ? 
 whi would you be so fond to overcom 
 the bonni prizer of the humor duke ? 
 your prais is come too swiftli home befor you . 
 know you not , master , to some kind of men 
 their grace serv them but as enemi ? 
 no more do your . your virtu , gentl master , 
 are sanctifi and holi traitor to you . 
 o , what a world is thi , when what is come 
 envenom him that bear it ! 
 orlando . whi , what 's the matter ? 
 adam . o unhappi youth ! 
 come not within these door ; within thi roof 
 the enemi of all your grace live . 
 your brother- no , no brother ; yet the son- 
 yet not the son ; i will not call him son 
 of him i wa about to call hi father- 
 hath heard your prais ; and thi night he mean 
 to burn the lodg where you use to lie , 
 and you within it . if he fail of that , 
 he will have other mean to cut you off ; 
 i overheard him and hi practic . 
 thi is no place ; thi hous is but a butcheri ; 
 abhor it , fear it , do not enter it . 
 orlando . whi , whither , adam , wouldst thou have me go ? 
 adam . no matter whither , so you come not here . 
 orlando . what , wouldst thou have me go and beg my food , 
 or with a base and boist'rou sword enforc 
 a thievish live on the common road ? 
 thi i must do , or know not what to do ; 
 yet thi i will not do , do how i can . 
 i rather will subject me to the malic 
 of a divert blood and bloodi brother . 
 adam . but do not so . i have five hundr crown , 
 the thrifti hire i sav 'd under your father , 
 which i did store to be my foster-nurs , 
 when servic should in my old limb lie lame , 
 and unregard age in corner thrown . 
 take that , and he that doth the raven feed , 
 yea , provid cater for the sparrow , 
 be comfort to my age ! here is the gold ; 
 all thi i give you . let me be your servant ; 
 though i look old , yet i am strong and lusti ; 
 for in my youth i never did appli 
 hot and rebelli liquor in my blood , 
 nor did not with unbash forehead woo 
 the mean of weak and debil ; 
 therefor my age is as a lusti winter , 
 frosti , but kindli . let me go with you ; 
 i 'll do the servic of a younger man 
 in all your busi and necess . 
 orlando . o good old man , how well in thee appear 
 the constant servic of the antiqu world , 
 when servic sweat for duti , not for meed ! 
 thou art not for the fashion of these time , 
 where none will sweat but for promot , 
 and have that do choke their servic up 
 even with the have ; it is not so with thee . 
 but , poor old man , thou prun'st a rotten tree 
 that can not so much as a blossom yield 
 in lieu of all thi pain and husbandri . 
 but come thi way , we 'll go along togeth , 
 and ere we have thi youth wage spent 
 we 'll light upon some settl low content . 
 adam . master , go on ; and i will follow the 
 to the last gasp , with truth and loyalti . 
 from seventeen year till now almost four-scor 
 here live i , but now live here no more . 
 at seventeen year mani their fortun seek , 
 but at fourscor it is too late a week ; 
 yet fortun can not recompens me better 
 than to die well and not my master 's debtor . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the forest of arden 
 
 enter rosalind for ganymed , celia for aliena , and clown alia touchston 
 
 rosalind . o jupit , how weari are my spirit ! 
 touchston . i care not for my spirit , if my leg were not weari . 
 rosalind . i could find in my heart to disgrac my man 's apparel , 
 and to cri like a woman ; but i must comfort the weaker vessel , as 
 doublet and hose ought to show itself courag to petticoat ; 
 therefor , courag , good aliena . 
 celia . i pray you bear with me ; i can not go no further . 
 touchston . for my part , i had rather bear with you than bear you ; 
 yet i should bear no cross if i did bear you ; for i think you 
 have no money in your purs . 
 rosalind . well , . thi is the forest of arden . 
 touchston . ay , now am i in arden ; the more fool i ; when i wa at 
 home i wa in a better place ; but travel must be content . 
 
 enter corin and silviu 
 
 rosalind . ay , be so , good touchston . look you , who come here , a 
 young man and an old in solemn talk . 
 corin . that is the way to make her scorn you still . 
 silviu . o corin , that thou knew'st how i do love her ! 
 corin . i partli guess ; for i have lov 'd ere now . 
 silviu . no , corin , be old , thou canst not guess , 
 though in thi youth thou wast as true a lover 
 as ever sigh 'd upon a midnight pillow . 
 but if thi love were ever like to mine , 
 as sure i think did never man love so , 
 how mani action most ridicul 
 hast thou been drawn to by thi fantasi ? 
 corin . into a thousand that i have forgotten . 
 silviu . o , thou didst then never love so heartili ! 
 if thou rememb'rest not the slightest folli 
 that ever love did make thee run into , 
 thou hast not lov 'd ; 
 or if thou hast not sat as i do now , 
 wear thi hearer in thi mistress ' prais , 
 thou hast not lov 'd ; 
 or if thou hast not broke from compani 
 abruptli , as my passion now make me , 
 thou hast not lov 'd . 
 o phebe , phebe , phebe ! exit silviu 
 rosalind . ala , poor shepherd ! search of thi wound , 
 i have by hard adventur found mine own . 
 touchston . and i mine . i rememb , when i wa in love , i broke my 
 sword upon a stone , and bid him take that for come a-night to 
 jane smile ; and i rememb the kiss of her batler , and the 
 cow 's dug that her pretti chopt hand had milk 'd ; and i rememb 
 the woo of peascod instead of her ; from whom i took two cod , 
 and give her them again , said with weep tear 'wear these 
 for my sake . ' we that are true lover run into strang caper ; 
 but as all is mortal in natur , so is all natur in love mortal 
 in folli . 
 rosalind . thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of . 
 touchston . nay , i shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till i break 
 my shin against it . 
 rosalind . jove , jove ! thi shepherd 's passion 
 is much upon my fashion . 
 touchston . and mine ; but it grow someth stale with me . 
 celia . i pray you , one of you question yond man 
 if he for gold will give us ani food ; 
 i faint almost to death . 
 touchston . holla , you clown ! 
 rosalind . peac , fool ; he 's not thi ensman . 
 corin . who call ? 
 touchston . your better , sir . 
 corin . els are they veri wretch . 
 rosalind . peac , i say . good even to you , friend . 
 corin . and to you , gentl sir , and to you all . 
 rosalind . i prithe , shepherd , if that love or gold 
 can in thi desert place buy entertain , 
 bring us where we may rest ourselv and feed . 
 here 's a young maid with travel much oppress 'd , 
 and faint for succour . 
 corin . fair sir , i piti her , 
 and wish , for her sake more than for mine own , 
 my fortun were more abl to reliev her ; 
 but i am shepherd to anoth man , 
 and do not shear the fleec that i graze . 
 my master is of churlish disposit , 
 and littl reck to find the way to heaven 
 by do deed of hospit . 
 besid , hi cote , hi flock , and bound of feed , 
 are now on sale ; and at our sheepcot now , 
 by reason of hi absenc , there is noth 
 that you will feed on ; but what is , come see , 
 and in my voic most welcom shall you be . 
 rosalind . what is he that shall buy hi flock and pastur ? 
 corin . that young swain that you saw here but erewhil , 
 that littl care for buy ani thing . 
 rosalind . i pray thee , if it stand with honesti , 
 buy thou the cottag , pastur , and the flock , 
 and thou shalt have to pay for it of us . 
 celia . and we will mend thi wage . i like thi place , 
 and willingli could wast my time in it . 
 corin . assuredli the thing is to be sold . 
 go with me ; if you like upon report 
 the soil , the profit , and thi kind of life , 
 i will your veri faith feeder be , 
 and buy it with your gold right suddenli . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 anoth part of the forest 
 
 enter amien , jaqu , and other 
 
 song 
 amien . under the greenwood tree 
 who love to lie with me , 
 and turn hi merri note 
 unto the sweet bird 's throat , 
 come hither , come hither , come hither . 
 here shall he see 
 no enemi 
 but winter and rough weather . 
 
 jaqu . more , more , i prithe , more . 
 amien . it will make you melancholi , monsieur jaqu . 
 jaqu . i thank it . more , i prithe , more . i can suck melancholi 
 out of a song , as a weasel suck egg . more , i prithe , more . 
 amien . my voic is rag ; i know i can not pleas you . 
 jaqu . i do not desir you to pleas me ; i do desir you to sing . 
 come , more ; anoth stanzo . call you 'em stanzo ? 
 amien . what you will , monsieur jaqu . 
 jaqu . nay , i care not for their name ; they owe me noth . will 
 you sing ? 
 amien . more at your request than to pleas myself . 
 jaqu . well then , if ever i thank ani man , i 'll thank you ; but 
 that they call compliment is like th ' encount of two dog-ap ; 
 and when a man thank me heartili , methink have given him a 
 penni , and he render me the beggarli thank . come , sing ; and you 
 that will not , hold your tongu . 
 amien . well , i 'll end the song . sir , cover the while ; the duke 
 will drink under thi tree . he hath been all thi day to look 
 you . 
 jaqu . and i have been all thi day to avoid him . he is to 
 disput for my compani . i think of as mani matter as he ; but 
 i give heaven thank , and make no boast of them . come , warbl , 
 come . 
 
 song 
 [ all togeth here ] 
 
 who doth ambit shun , 
 and love to live i ' th ' sun , 
 seek the food he eat , 
 and plea 'd with what he get , 
 come hither , come hither , come hither . 
 here shall he see 
 no enemi 
 but winter and rough weather . 
 
 jaqu . i 'll give you a vers to thi note that i made yesterday in 
 despit of my invent . 
 amien . and i 'll sing it . 
 jaqu . thu it goe : 
 
 if it do come to pass 
 that ani man turn ass , 
 leav hi wealth and eas 
 a stubborn will to pleas , 
 ducdam , ducdam , ducdam ; 
 here shall he see 
 gross fool as he , 
 an if he will come to me . 
 
 amien . what 's that 'ducdam ' ? 
 jaqu . 't is a greek invoc , to call fool into a circl . i 'll 
 go sleep , if i can ; if i can not , i 'll rail against all the 
 first-born of egypt . 
 amien . and i 'll go seek the duke ; hi banquet is prepar 'd . 
 exeunt sever 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 the forest 
 
 enter orlando and adam 
 
 adam . dear master , i can go no further . o , i die for food ! here lie 
 i down , and measur out my grave . farewel , kind master . 
 orlando . whi , how now , adam ! no greater heart in thee ? live a 
 littl ; comfort a littl ; cheer thyself a littl . if thi uncouth 
 forest yield anyth savag , i will either be food for it or 
 bring it for food to thee . thi conceit is nearer death than thi 
 power . for my sake be comfort ; hold death awhil at the 
 arm 's end . i will here be with the present ; and if i bring thee 
 not someth to eat , i will give thee leav to die ; but if thou 
 diest befor i come , thou art a mocker of my labour . well said ! 
 thou look'st cheerli ; and i 'll be with thee quickli . yet thou 
 liest in the bleak air . come , i will bear thee to some shelter ; 
 and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner , if there live 
 anyth in thi desert . cheerli , good adam ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 the forest 
 
 a tabl set out . enter duke senior , amien , and lord , like outlaw 
 
 duke senior . i think he be transform 'd into a beast ; 
 for i can nowher find him like a man . 
 first lord . my lord , he is but even now gone henc ; 
 here wa he merri , hear of a song . 
 duke senior . if he , compact of jar , grow music , 
 we shall have shortli discord in the sphere . 
 go seek him ; tell him i would speak with him . 
 
 enter jaqu 
 
 first lord . he save my labour by hi own approach . 
 duke senior . whi , how now , monsieur ! what a life is thi , 
 that your poor friend must woo your compani ? 
 what , you look merrili ! 
 jaqu . a fool , a fool ! i met a fool i ' th ' forest , 
 a motley fool . a miser world ! 
 as i do live by food , i met a fool , 
 who laid him down and bask 'd him in the sun , 
 and rail 'd on ladi fortun in good term , 
 in good set terms- and yet a motley fool . 
 'good morrow , fool , ' quoth i ; 'no , sir , ' quoth he , 
 'call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortun . ' 
 and then he drew a dial from hi poke , 
 and , look on it with lack-lustr eye , 
 say veri wise , 'it is ten o'clock ; 
 thu we may see , ' quoth he , 'how the world wag ; 
 't is but an hour ago sinc it wa nine ; 
 and after one hour more 'twill be eleven ; 
 and so , from hour to hour , we ripe and ripe , 
 and then , from hour to hour , we rot and rot ; 
 and therebi hang a tale . ' when i did hear 
 the motley fool thu moral on the time , 
 my lung began to crow like chanticl 
 that fool should be so deep contempl ; 
 and i did laugh san intermiss 
 an hour by hi dial . o nobl fool ! 
 a worthi fool ! motley 's the onli wear . 
 duke senior . what fool is thi ? 
 jaqu . o worthi fool ! one that hath been a courtier , 
 and say , if ladi be but young and fair , 
 they have the gift to know it ; and in hi brain , 
 which is as dri as the remaind biscuit 
 after a voyag , he hath strang place cramm 'd 
 with observ , the which he vent 
 in mangl form . o that i were a fool ! 
 i am ambiti for a motley coat . 
 duke senior . thou shalt have one . 
 jaqu . it is my onli suit , 
 provid that you weed your better judgment 
 of all opinion that grow rank in them 
 that i am wise . i must have liberti 
 withal , as larg a charter as the wind , 
 to blow on whom i pleas , for so fool have ; 
 and they that are most gall with my folli , 
 they most must laugh . and whi , sir , must they so ? 
 the whi is plain as way to parish church : 
 he that a fool doth veri wise hit 
 doth veri foolishli , although he smart , 
 not to seem senseless of the bob ; if not , 
 the wise man 's folli is anatomiz 'd 
 even by the squand'r glanc of the fool . 
 invest me in my motley ; give me leav 
 to speak my mind , and i will through and through 
 cleans the foul bodi of th ' infect world , 
 if they will patient receiv my medicin . 
 duke senior . fie on thee ! i can tell what thou wouldst do . 
 jaqu . what , for a counter , would i do but good ? 
 duke senior . most mischiev foul sin , in chide sin ; 
 for thou thyself hast been a libertin , 
 as sensual as the brutish sting itself ; 
 and all th ' emboss sore and head evil 
 that thou with licens of free foot hast caught 
 wouldst thou disgorg into the gener world . 
 jaqu . whi , who cri out on pride 
 that can therein tax ani privat parti ? 
 doth it not flow as huge as the sea , 
 till that the wearer 's veri mean do ebb ? 
 what woman in the citi do i name 
 when that i say the city-woman bear 
 the cost of princ on unworthi shoulder ? 
 who can come in and say that i mean her , 
 when such a one as she such is her neighbour ? 
 or what is he of basest function 
 that say hi braveri is not on my cost , 
 think that i mean him , but therein suit 
 hi folli to the mettl of my speech ? 
 there then ! how then ? what then ? let me see wherein 
 my tongu hath wrong 'd him : if it do him right , 
 then he hath wrong 'd himself ; if he be free , 
 whi then my tax like a wild-goos fli , 
 unclaim 'd of ani man . but who come here ? 
 
 enter orlando with hi sword drawn 
 
 orlando . forbear , and eat no more . 
 jaqu . whi , i have eat none yet . 
 orlando . nor shalt not , till necess be serv 'd . 
 jaqu . of what kind should thi cock come of ? 
 duke senior . art thou thu bolden 'd , man , by thi distress ? 
 or els a rude despis of good manner , 
 that in civil thou seem'st so empti ? 
 orlando . you touch 'd my vein at first : the thorni point 
 of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show 
 of smooth civil ; yet arn i inland bred , 
 and know some nurtur . but forbear , i say ; 
 he die that touch ani of thi fruit 
 till i and my affair are answer . 
 jaqu . an you will not be answer 'd with reason , i must die . 
 duke senior . what would you have ? your gentl shall forc 
 more than your forc move us to gentl . 
 orlando . i almost die for food , and let me have it . 
 duke senior . sit down and feed , and welcom to our tabl . 
 orlando . speak you so gentli ? pardon me , i pray you ; 
 i thought that all thing had been savag here , 
 and therefor put i on the counten 
 of stern command . but whate' you are 
 that in thi desert inaccess , 
 under the shade of melancholi bough , 
 lose and neglect the creep hour of time ; 
 if ever you have look 'd on better day , 
 if ever been where bell have knoll 'd to church , 
 if ever sat at ani good man 's feast , 
 if ever from your eyelid wip 'd a tear , 
 and know what 't is to piti and be piti , 
 let gentl my strong enforc be ; 
 in the which hope i blush , and hide my sword . 
 duke senior . true is it that we have seen better day , 
 and have with holi bell been knoll 'd to church , 
 and sat at good men 's feast , and wip 'd our eye 
 of drop that sacr piti hath engend'r ; 
 and therefor sit you down in gentl , 
 and take upon command what help we have 
 that to your want may be minist'r . 
 orlando . then but forbear your food a littl while , 
 while , like a doe , i go to find my fawn , 
 and give it food . there is an old poor man 
 who after me hath mani a weari step 
 limp 'd in pure love ; till he be first suffic 'd , 
 oppress 'd with two weak evil , age and hunger , 
 i will not touch a bit . 
 duke senior . go find him out . 
 and we will noth wast till you return . 
 orlando . i thank ye ; and be blest for your good comfort ! 
 exit 
 duke senior . thou seest we are not all alon unhappi : 
 thi wide and univers theatr 
 present more woeful pageant than the scene 
 wherein we play in . 
 jaqu . all the world 's a stage , 
 and all the men and women mere player ; 
 they have their exit and their entranc ; 
 and one man in hi time play mani part , 
 hi act be seven age . at first the infant , 
 mewl and puke in the nurs 's arm ; 
 then the whine school-boy , with hi satchel 
 and shine morn face , creep like snail 
 unwillingli to school . and then the lover , 
 sigh like furnac , with a woeful ballad 
 made to hi mistress ' eyebrow . then a soldier , 
 full of strang oath , and beard like the pard , 
 jealou in honour , sudden and quick in quarrel , 
 seek the bubbl reput 
 even in the cannon 's mouth . and then the justic , 
 in fair round belli with good capon lin 'd , 
 with eye sever and beard of formal cut , 
 full of wise saw and modern instanc ; 
 and so he play hi part . the sixth age shift 
 into the lean and slipper 'd pantaloon , 
 with spectacl on nose and pouch on side , 
 hi youth hose , well sav 'd , a world too wide 
 for hi shrunk shank ; and hi big manli voic , 
 turn again toward childish trebl , pipe 
 and whistl in hi sound . last scene of all , 
 that end thi strang event histori , 
 is second childish and mere oblivion ; 
 san teeth , san eye , san tast , san everi thing . 
 
 re-ent orlando with adam 
 
 duke senior . welcom . set down your vener burden . 
 and let him feed . 
 orlando . i thank you most for him . 
 adam . so had you need ; 
 i scarc can speak to thank you for myself . 
 duke senior . welcom ; fall to . i will not troubl you 
 as yet to question you about your fortun . 
 give us some music ; and , good cousin , sing . 
 
 song 
 blow , blow , thou winter wind , 
 thou art not so unkind 
 as man 's ingratitud ; 
 thi tooth is not so keen , 
 becaus thou art not seen , 
 although thi breath be rude . 
 heigh-ho ! sing heigh-ho ! unto the green holli . 
 most friendship is feign , most love mere folli . 
 then , heigh-ho , the holli ! 
 thi life is most jolli . 
 
 freez , freez , thou bitter sky , 
 that dost not bite so nigh 
 as benefit forgot ; 
 though thou the water warp , 
 thi sting is not so sharp 
 as friend rememb'r not . 
 heigh-ho ! sing , & c. 
 
 duke senior . if that you were the good sir rowland 's son , 
 as you have whisper 'd faith you were , 
 and as mine eye doth hi effigi wit 
 most truli limn 'd and live in your face , 
 be truli welcom hither . i am the duke 
 that lov 'd your father . the residu of your fortun , 
 go to my cave and tell me . good old man , 
 thou art right welcom as thi master is . 
 support him by the arm . give me your hand , 
 and let me all your fortun understand . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 the palac 
 
 enter duke frederick , oliv , and lord 
 
 frederick . not see him sinc ! sir , sir , that can not be . 
 but were i not the better part made merci , 
 i should not seek an absent argument 
 of my reveng , thou present . but look to it : 
 find out thi brother wheresoe' he is ; 
 seek him with candl ; bring him dead or live 
 within thi twelvemonth , or turn thou no more 
 to seek a live in our territori . 
 thi land and all thing that thou dost call thine 
 worth seizur do we seiz into our hand , 
 till thou canst quit thee by thi brother 's mouth 
 of what we think against thee . 
 oliv . o that your high knew my heart in thi ! 
 i never lov 'd my brother in my life . 
 frederick . more villain thou . well , push him out of door ; 
 and let my offic of such a natur 
 make an extent upon hi hous and land . 
 do thi expedi , and turn him go . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the forest 
 
 enter orlando , with a paper 
 
 orlando . hang there , my vers , in wit of my love ; 
 and thou , thrice-crown queen of night , survey 
 with thi chast eye , from thi pale sphere abov , 
 thi huntress ' name that my full life doth sway . 
 o rosalind ! these tree shall be my book , 
 and in their bark my thought i 'll charact , 
 that everi eye which in thi forest look 
 shall see thi virtu wit 'd everi where . 
 run , run , orlando ; carv on everi tree , 
 the fair , the chast , and unexpress she . exit 
 
 enter corin and touchston 
 
 corin . and how like you thi shepherd 's life , master touchston ? 
 touchston . truli , shepherd , in respect of itself , it is a good 
 life ; but in respect that it is a shepherd 's life , it is nought . 
 in respect that it is solitari , i like it veri well ; but in 
 respect that it is privat , it is a veri vile life . now in 
 respect it is in the field , it pleaseth me well ; but in respect 
 it is not in the court , it is tediou . as it is a spare life , 
 look you , it fit my humour well ; but as there is no more plenti 
 in it , it goe much against my stomach . hast ani philosophi in 
 thee , shepherd ? 
 corin . no more but that i know the more one sicken the wors at 
 eas he is ; and that he that want money , mean , and content , is 
 without three good friend ; that the properti of rain is to wet , 
 and fire to burn ; that good pastur make fat sheep ; and that a 
 great caus of the night is lack of the sun ; that he that hath 
 learn no wit by natur nor art may complain of good breed , 
 or come of a veri dull kindr . 
 touchston . such a one is a natur philosoph . wast ever in 
 court , shepherd ? 
 corin . no , truli . 
 touchston . then thou art damn 'd . 
 corin . nay , i hope . 
 touchston . truli , thou art damn 'd , like an ill-roast egg , all on 
 one side . 
 corin . for not be at court ? your reason . 
 touchston . whi , if thou never wast at court thou never saw'st good 
 manner ; if thou never saw'st good manner , then thi manner must 
 be wick ; and wicked is sin , and sin is damnat . thou art 
 in a parlou state , shepherd . 
 corin . not a whit , touchston . those that are good manner at the 
 court are as ridicul in the countri as the behaviour of the 
 countri is most mockabl at the court . you told me you salut not 
 at the court , but you kiss your hand ; that courtesi would be 
 uncleanli if courtier were shepherd . 
 touchston . instanc , briefli ; come , instanc . 
 corin . whi , we are still handl our ewe ; and their fell , you 
 know , are greasi . 
 touchston . whi , do not your courtier 's hand sweat ? and is not the 
 greas of a mutton as wholesom as the sweat of a man ? shallow , 
 shallow . a better instanc , i say ; come . 
 corin . besid , our hand are hard . 
 touchston . your lip will feel them the sooner . shallow again . a 
 more sounder instanc ; come . 
 corin . and they are often tarr 'd over with the surgeri of our 
 sheep ; and would you have us kiss tar ? the courtier 's hand are 
 perfum 'd with civet . 
 touchston . most shallow man ! thou worm 's meat in respect of a good 
 piec of flesh inde ! learn of the wise , and perpend : civet is 
 of a baser birth than tar- the veri uncleanli flux of a cat . mend 
 the instanc , shepherd . 
 corin . you have too courtli a wit for me ; i 'll rest . 
 touchston . wilt thou rest damn 'd ? god help thee , shallow man ! god 
 make incis in thee ! thou art raw . 
 corin . sir , i am a true labour : i earn that i eat , get that i 
 wear ; owe no man hate , envi no man 's happi ; glad of other 
 men 's good , content with my harm ; and the greatest of my pride is 
 to see my ewe graze and my lamb suck . 
 touchston . that is anoth simpl sin in you : to bring the ewe 
 and the ram togeth , and to offer to get your live by the 
 copul of cattl ; to be bawd to a bell-weth , and to betray 
 a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to crooked-p , old , cuckoldli ram , 
 out of all reason match . if thou beest not damn 'd for thi , 
 the devil himself will have no shepherd ; i can not see els how 
 thou shouldst scape . 
 corin . here come young master ganymed , my new mistress 's brother . 
 
 enter rosalind , read a paper 
 
 rosalind . 'from the east to western ind , 
 no jewel is like rosalind . 
 her worth , be mount on the wind , 
 through all the world bear rosalind . 
 all the pictur fairest lin 'd 
 are but black to rosalind . 
 let no face be kept in mind 
 but the fair of rosalind . ' 
 touchston . i 'll rhyme you so eight year togeth , dinner , and 
 supper , and sleep hour , except . it is the right 
 butter-women 's rank to market . 
 rosalind . out , fool ! 
 touchston . for a tast : 
 if a hart do lack a hind , 
 let him seek out rosalind . 
 if the cat will after kind , 
 so be sure will rosalind . 
 winter garment must be lin 'd , 
 so must slender rosalind . 
 they that reap must sheaf and bind , 
 then to cart with rosalind . 
 sweetest nut hath sourest rind , 
 such a nut is rosalind . 
 he that sweetest rose will find 
 must find love 's prick and rosalind . 
 thi is the veri fals gallop of vers ; whi do you infect 
 yourself with them ? 
 rosalind . peac , you dull fool ! i found them on a tree . 
 touchston . truli , the tree yield bad fruit . 
 rosalind . i 'll graff it with you , and then i shall graff it with a 
 medlar . then it will be the earliest fruit i ' th ' countri ; for 
 you 'll be rotten ere you be half ripe , and that 's the right 
 virtu of the medlar . 
 touchston . you have said ; but whether wise or no , let the forest 
 judg . 
 
 enter celia , with a write 
 
 rosalind . peac ! 
 here come my sister , read ; stand asid . 
 celia . 'whi should thi a desert be ? 
 for it is unpeopl ? no ; 
 tongu i 'll hang on everi tree 
 that shall civil say show . 
 some , how brief the life of man 
 run hi er pilgrimag , 
 that the strech of a span 
 buckl in hi sum of age ; 
 some , of violat vow 
 'twixt the soul of friend and friend ; 
 but upon the fairest bough , 
 or at everi sentenc end , 
 will i rosalinda write , 
 teach all that read to know 
 the quintess of everi sprite 
 heaven would in littl show . 
 therefor heaven natur charg 'd 
 that one bodi should be fill 'd 
 with all grace wide-enlarg 'd . 
 natur present distil 'd 
 helen 's cheek , but not her heart , 
 cleopatra 's majesti , 
 atalanta 's better part , 
 sad lucretia 's modesti . 
 thu rosalind of mani part 
 by heavenli synod wa devi 'd , 
 of mani face , eye , and heart , 
 to have the touch dearest priz 'd . 
 heaven would that she these gift should have , 
 and i to live and die her slave . ' 
 rosalind . o most gentl pulpit ! what tediou homili of love have 
 you weari your parishion withal , and never cri 'have 
 patienc , good peopl . ' 
 celia . how now ! back , friend ; shepherd , go off a littl ; go with 
 him , sirrah . 
 touchston . come , shepherd , let us make an honour retreat ; 
 though not with bag and baggag , yet with scrip and scrippag . 
 exeunt corin and touchston 
 celia . didst thou hear these vers ? 
 rosalind . o , ye , i heard them all , and more too ; for some of them 
 had in them more feet than the vers would bear . 
 celia . that 's no matter ; the feet might bear the vers . 
 rosalind . ay , but the feet were lame , and could not bear themselv 
 without the vers , and therefor stood lame in the vers . 
 celia . but didst thou hear without wonder how thi name should be 
 hang 'd and carv upon these tree ? 
 rosalind . i wa seven of the nine day out of the wonder befor you 
 came ; for look here what i found on a palm-tre . i wa never so 
 berhym 'd sinc pythagora ' time that i wa an irish rat , which i 
 can hardli rememb . 
 celia . trow you who hath done thi ? 
 rosalind . is it a man ? 
 celia . and a chain , that you onc wore , about hi neck . 
 chang you colour ? 
 rosalind . i prithe , who ? 
 celia . o lord , lord ! it is a hard matter for friend to meet ; but 
 mountain may be remov 'd with earthquak , and so encount . 
 rosalind . nay , but who is it ? 
 celia . is it possibl ? 
 rosalind . nay , i prithe now , with most petitionari vehem , tell 
 me who it is . 
 celia . o wonder , wonder , most wonder wonder , and yet 
 again wonder , and after that , out of all whoop ! 
 rosalind . good my complexion ! dost thou think , though i am 
 caparison 'd like a man , i have a doublet and hose in my 
 disposit ? one inch of delay more is a south sea of discoveri . 
 i prithe tell me who is it quickli , and speak apac . i would 
 thou could'st stammer , that thou mightst pour thi conceal 'd man 
 out of thi mouth , as wine come out of narrow-mouth 'd bottle- 
 either too much at onc or none at all . i prithe take the cork 
 out of thi mouth that i may drink thi tide . 
 celia . so you may put a man in your belli . 
 rosalind . is he of god 's make ? what manner of man ? 
 is hi head worth a hat or hi chin worth a beard ? 
 celia . nay , he hath but a littl beard . 
 rosalind . whi , god will send more if the man will be thank . let 
 me stay the growth of hi beard , if thou delay me not the 
 knowledg of hi chin . 
 celia . it is young orlando , that tripp 'd up the wrestler 's heel 
 and your heart both in an instant . 
 rosalind . nay , but the devil take mock ! speak sad brow and true 
 maid . 
 celia . i ' faith , coz , 't is he . 
 rosalind . orlando ? 
 celia . orlando . 
 rosalind . ala the day ! what shall i do with my doublet and hose ? 
 what did he when thou saw'st him ? what said he ? how look 'd he ? 
 wherein went he ? what make he here ? did he ask for me ? where 
 remain he ? how part he with thee ? and when shalt thou see him 
 again ? answer me in one word . 
 celia . you must borrow me gargantua 's mouth first ; 't is a word too 
 great for ani mouth of thi age 's size . to say ay and no to these 
 particular is more than to answer in a catech . 
 rosalind . but doth he know that i am in thi forest , and in man 's 
 apparel ? look he as freshli as he did the day he wrestl ? 
 celia . it is as easi to count atomi as to resolv the 
 proposit of a lover ; but take a tast of my find him , and 
 relish it with good observ . i found him under a tree , like a 
 dropp 'd acorn . 
 rosalind . it may well be call 'd jove 's tree , when it drop forth 
 such fruit . 
 celia . give me audienc , good madam . 
 rosalind . proceed . 
 celia . there lay he , stretch 'd along like a wound knight . 
 rosalind . though it be piti to see such a sight , it well becom 
 the ground . 
 celia . cri 'holla ' to thi tongu , i prithe ; it curvet 
 unseason . he wa furnish 'd like a hunter . 
 rosalind . o , omin ! he come to kill my heart . 
 celia . i would sing my song without a burden ; thou bring'st me out 
 of tune . 
 rosalind . do you not know i am a woman ? when i think , i must speak . 
 sweet , say on . 
 celia . you bring me out . soft ! come he not here ? 
 
 enter orlando and jaqu 
 
 rosalind . 't is he ; slink by , and note him . 
 jaqu . i thank you for your compani ; but , good faith , i had as 
 lief have been myself alon . 
 orlando . and so had i ; but yet , for fashion sake , i thank you too 
 for your societi . 
 jaqu . god buy you ; let 's meet as littl as we can . 
 orlando . i do desir we may be better stranger . 
 jaqu . i pray you mar no more tree with write love song in 
 their bark . 
 orlando . i pray you mar no more of my vers with read them 
 ill-favouredli . 
 jaqu . rosalind is your love 's name ? 
 orlando . ye , just . 
 jaqu . i do not like her name . 
 orlando . there wa no thought of pleas you when she wa 
 christen 'd . 
 jaqu . what statur is she of ? 
 orlando . just as high as my heart . 
 jaqu . you are full of pretti answer . have you not been 
 acquaint with goldsmith ' wive , and conn 'd them out of ring ? 
 orlando . not so ; but i answer you right paint cloth , from whenc 
 you have studi your question . 
 jaqu . you have a nimbl wit ; i think 't wa made of atalanta 's 
 heel . will you sit down with me ? and we two will rail against 
 our mistress the world , and all our miseri . 
 orlando . i will chide no breather in the world but myself , against 
 whom i know most fault . 
 jaqu . the worst fault you have is to be in love . 
 orlando . 't is a fault i will not chang for your best virtu . i am 
 weari of you . 
 jaqu . by my troth , i wa seek for a fool when i found you . 
 orlando . he is drown 'd in the brook ; look but in , and you shall see 
 him . 
 jaqu . there i shall see mine own figur . 
 orlando . which i take to be either a fool or a cipher . 
 jaqu . i 'll tarri no longer with you ; farewel , good signior love . 
 orlando . i am glad of your departur ; adieu , good monsieur 
 melancholi . 
 exit jaqu 
 rosalind . [ asid to celia ] i will speak to him like a sauci lackey , 
 and under that habit play the knave with him.- do you hear , 
 forest ? 
 orlando . veri well ; what would you ? 
 rosalind . i pray you , what is't o'clock ? 
 orlando . you should ask me what time o ' day ; there 's no clock in 
 the forest . 
 rosalind . then there is no true lover in the forest , els sigh 
 everi minut and groan everi hour would detect the lazi foot 
 of time as well as a clock . 
 orlando . and whi not the swift foot of time ? had not that been as 
 proper ? 
 rosalind . by no mean , sir . time travel in diver pace with 
 diver person . i 'll tell you who time ambl withal , who time 
 trot withal , who time gallop withal , and who he stand still 
 withal . 
 orlando . i prithe , who doth he trot withal ? 
 rosalind . marri , he trot hard with a young maid between the 
 contract of her marriag and the day it is solemniz 'd ; if the 
 interim be but a se'nnight , time 's pace is so hard that it seem 
 the length of seven year . 
 orlando . who ambl time withal ? 
 rosalind . with a priest that lack latin and a rich man that hath 
 not the gout ; for the one sleep easili becaus he can not studi , 
 and the other live merrili becaus he feel no pain ; the one 
 lack the burden of lean and wast learn , the other 
 know no burden of heavi tediou penuri . these time ambl 
 withal . 
 orlando . who doth he gallop withal ? 
 rosalind . with a thief to the gallow ; for though he go as softli 
 as foot can fall , he think himself too soon there . 
 orlando . who stay it still withal ? 
 rosalind . with lawyer in the vacat ; for they sleep between term 
 and term , and then they perceiv not how time move . 
 orlando . where dwell you , pretti youth ? 
 rosalind . with thi shepherdess , my sister ; here in the skirt of 
 the forest , like fring upon a petticoat . 
 orlando . are you nativ of thi place ? 
 rosalind . as the coney that you see dwell where she is kindl . 
 orlando . your accent is someth finer than you could purchas in 
 so remov a dwell . 
 rosalind . i have been told so of mani ; but inde an old religi 
 uncl of mine taught me to speak , who wa in hi youth an inland 
 man ; one that knew courtship too well , for there he fell in love . 
 i have heard him read mani lectur against it ; and i thank god i 
 am not a woman , to be touch 'd with so mani giddi offenc as he 
 hath gener tax 'd their whole sex withal . 
 orlando . can you rememb ani of the princip evil that he laid 
 to the charg of women ? 
 rosalind . there were none princip ; they were all like one anoth 
 as halfpenc are ; everi one fault seem monstrou till hi 
 fellow-fault came to match it . 
 orlando . i prithe recount some of them . 
 rosalind . no ; i will not cast away my physic but on those that are 
 sick . there is a man haunt the forest that abus our young 
 plant with carv 'rosalind ' on their bark ; hang ode upon 
 hawthorn and elegi on brambl ; all , forsooth , deifi the 
 name of rosalind . if i could meet that fancy-mong , i would give 
 him some good counsel , for he seem to have the quotidian of love 
 upon him . 
 orlando . i am he that is so love-shak 'd ; i pray you tell me your 
 remedi . 
 rosalind . there is none of my uncl 's mark upon you ; he taught me 
 how to know a man in love ; in which cage of rush i am sure you 
 are not prison . 
 orlando . what were hi mark ? 
 rosalind . a lean cheek , which you have not ; a blue eye and sunken , 
 which you have not ; an unquestion spirit , which you have not ; 
 a beard neglect , which you have not ; but i pardon you for that , 
 for simpli your have in beard is a younger brother 's revenu . 
 then your hose should be ungart 'd , your bonnet unband , your 
 sleev unbutton 'd , your shoe unti , and everi thing about you 
 demonstr a careless desol . but you are no such man ; you 
 are rather point-devic in your accoutr , as love yourself 
 than seem the lover of ani other . 
 orlando . fair youth , i would i could make thee believ i love . 
 rosalind . me believ it ! you may as soon make her that you love 
 believ it ; which , i warrant , she is apter to do than to confess 
 she doe . that is one of the point in the which women still give 
 the lie to their conscienc . but , in good sooth , are you he that 
 hang the vers on the tree wherein rosalind is so admir ? 
 orlando . i swear to thee , youth , by the white hand of rosalind , i 
 am that he , that unfortun he . 
 rosalind . but are you so much in love as your rhyme speak ? 
 orlando . neither rhyme nor reason can express how much . 
 rosalind . love is mere a mad ; and , i tell you , deserv as 
 well a dark hous and a whip as madmen do ; and the reason whi 
 they are not so punish 'd and cure is that the lunaci is so 
 ordinari that the whipper are in love too . yet i profess cure 
 it by counsel . 
 orlando . did you ever cure ani so ? 
 rosalind . ye , one ; and in thi manner . he wa to imagin me hi 
 love , hi mistress ; and i set him everi day to woo me ; at which 
 time would i , be but a moonish youth , griev , be effemin , 
 changeabl , long and like , proud , fantast , apish , 
 shallow , inconst , full of tear , full of smile ; for everi 
 passion someth and for no passion truli anyth , as boy and 
 women are for the most part cattl of thi colour ; would now like 
 him , now loath him ; then entertain him , then forswear him ; now 
 weep for him , then spit at him ; that i drave my suitor from hi 
 mad humour of love to a live humour of mad ; which wa , to 
 forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook 
 mere monast . and thu i cur 'd him ; and thi way will i take 
 upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep 's heart , 
 that there shall not be one spot of love in 't . 
 orlando . i would not be cure , youth . 
 rosalind . i would cure you , if you would but call me rosalind , and 
 come everi day to my cote and woo me . 
 orlando . now , by the faith of my love , i will . tell me where it is . 
 rosalind . go with me to it , and i 'll show it you ; and , by the way , 
 you shall tell me where in the forest you live . will you go ? 
 orlando . with all my heart , good youth . 
 rosalind . nay , you must call me rosalind . come , sister , will you 
 go ? exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the forest 
 
 enter touchston and audrey ; jaqu behind 
 
 touchston . come apac , good audrey ; i will fetch up your goat , 
 audrey . and how , audrey , am i the man yet ? doth my simpl featur 
 content you ? 
 audrey . your featur ! lord warrant us ! what featur ? 
 touchston . i am here with thee and thi goat , as the most 
 caprici poet , honest ovid , wa among the goth . 
 jaqu . [ asid ] o knowledg ill-inhabit , wors than jove in a 
 thatch 'd hous ! 
 touchston . when a man 's vers can not be understood , nor a man 's 
 good wit second with the forward child understand , it 
 strike a man more dead than a great reckon in a littl room . 
 truli , i would the god had made thee poetic . 
 audrey . i do not know what 'poetic ' is . is it honest in deed and 
 word ? is it a true thing ? 
 touchston . no , truli ; for the truest poetri is the most feign , 
 and lover are given to poetri ; and what they swear in poetri may 
 be said as lover they do feign . 
 audrey . do you wish , then , that the god had made me poetic ? 
 touchston . i do , truli , for thou swear'st to me thou art honest ; 
 now , if thou wert a poet , i might have some hope thou didst 
 feign . 
 audrey . would you not have me honest ? 
 touchston . no , truli , unless thou wert hard-favour 'd ; for honesti 
 coupl to beauti is to have honey a sauc to sugar . 
 jaqu . [ asid ] a materi fool ! 
 audrey . well , i am not fair ; and therefor i pray the god make me 
 honest . 
 touchston . truli , and to cast away honesti upon a foul slut were 
 to put good meat into an unclean dish . 
 audrey . i am not a slut , though i thank the god i am foul . 
 touchston . well , prais be the god for thi foul ; 
 sluttish may come hereaft . but be it as it may be , i will 
 marri thee ; and to that end i have been with sir oliv martext , 
 the vicar of the next villag , who hath promi 'd to meet me in 
 thi place of the forest , and to coupl us . 
 jaqu . [ asid ] i would fain see thi meet . 
 audrey . well , the god give us joy ! 
 touchston . amen . a man may , if he were of a fear heart , stagger 
 in thi attempt ; for here we have no templ but the wood , no 
 assembl but horn-beast . but what though ? courag ! as horn are 
 odiou , they are necessari . it is said : 'mani a man know no end 
 of hi good . ' right ! mani a man ha good horn and know no end 
 of them . well , that is the dowri of hi wife ; 't is none of hi 
 own get . horn ? even so . poor men alon ? no , no ; the noblest 
 deer hath them as huge as the rascal . is the singl man therefor 
 bless ? no ; as a wall 'd town is more worthier than a villag , so 
 is the forehead of a marri man more honour than the bare 
 brow of a bachelor ; and by how much defenc is better than no 
 skill , by so much is horn more preciou than to want . here come 
 sir oliv . 
 
 enter sir oliv martext 
 
 sir oliv martext , you are well met . will you dispatch us here 
 under thi tree , or shall we go with you to your chapel ? 
 martext . is there none here to give the woman ? 
 touchston . i will not take her on gift of ani man . 
 martext . truli , she must be given , or the marriag is not law . 
 jaqu . [ discov himself ] proceed , proceed ; i 'll give her . 
 touchston . good even , good master what-ye-call't ; how do you , sir ? 
 you are veri well met . goddild you for your last compani . i am 
 veri glad to see you . even a toy in hand here , sir . nay ; pray be 
 cover 'd . 
 jaqu . will you be marri , motley ? 
 touchston . as the ox hath hi bow , sir , the hors hi curb , and 
 the falcon her bell , so man hath hi desir ; and as pigeon 
 bill , so wedlock would be nibbl . 
 jaqu . and will you , be a man of your breed , be marri 
 under a bush , like a beggar ? get you to church and have a good 
 priest that can tell you what marriag is ; thi fellow will but 
 join you togeth as they join wainscot ; then one of you will 
 prove a shrunk panel , and like green timber warp , warp . 
 touchston . [ asid ] i am not in the mind but i were better to be 
 marri of him than of anoth ; for he is not like to marri me 
 well ; and not be well marri , it will be a good excus for me 
 hereaft to leav my wife . 
 jaqu . go thou with me , and let me counsel thee . 
 touchston . come , sweet audrey ; 
 we must be marri or we must live in bawdri . 
 farewel , good master oliv . not- 
 o sweet oliv , 
 o brave oliv , 
 leav me not behind thee . 
 but- 
 wind away , 
 begon , i say , 
 i will not to wed with thee . 
 exeunt jaqu , touchston , and audrey 
 martext . 't is no matter ; ne'er a fantast knave of them all 
 shall flout me out of my call . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the forest 
 
 enter rosalind and celia 
 
 rosalind . never talk to me ; i will weep . 
 celia . do , i prithe ; but yet have the grace to consid that tear 
 do not becom a man . 
 rosalind . but have i not caus to weep ? 
 celia . as good caus as one would desir ; therefor weep . 
 rosalind . hi veri hair is of the dissembl colour . 
 celia . someth browner than juda 's . 
 marri , hi kiss are juda 's own children . 
 rosalind . i ' faith , hi hair is of a good colour . 
 celia . an excel colour : your chestnut wa ever the onli colour . 
 rosalind . and hi kiss is as full of sanctiti as the touch of 
 holi bread . 
 celia . he hath bought a pair of cast lip of diana . a nun of 
 winter 's sisterhood kiss not more religi ; the veri ice of 
 chastiti is in them . 
 rosalind . but whi did he swear he would come thi morn , and 
 come not ? 
 celia . nay , certainli , there is no truth in him . 
 rosalind . do you think so ? 
 celia . ye ; i think he is not a pick-purs nor a horse-steal ; but 
 for hi veriti in love , i do think him as concav as cover 
 goblet or a worm-eaten nut . 
 rosalind . not true in love ? 
 celia . ye , when he is in ; but i think he is not in . 
 rosalind . you have heard him swear downright he wa . 
 celia . 'wa ' is not 'i ' ; besid , the oath of a lover is no 
 stronger than the word of a tapster ; they are both the confirm 
 of fals reckon . he attend here in the forest on the duke , 
 your father . 
 rosalind . i met the duke yesterday , and had much question with him . 
 he ask me of what parentag i wa ; i told him , of as good as 
 he ; so he laugh 'd and let me go . but what talk we of father when 
 there is such a man as orlando ? 
 celia . o , that 's a brave man ! he write brave vers , speak brave 
 word , swear brave oath , and break them brave , quit 
 travers , athwart the heart of hi lover ; as a puni tilter , that 
 spur hi hors but on one side , break hi staff like a nobl 
 goos . but all 's brave that youth mount and folli guid . who 
 come here ? 
 
 enter corin 
 
 corin . mistress and master , you have oft enquir 
 after the shepherd that complain 'd of love , 
 who you saw sit by me on the turf , 
 prais the proud disdain shepherdess 
 that wa hi mistress . 
 celia . well , and what of him ? 
 corin . if you will see a pageant truli play 'd 
 between the pale complexion of true love 
 and the red glow of scorn and proud disdain , 
 go henc a littl , and i shall conduct you , 
 if you will mark it . 
 rosalind . o , come , let us remov ! 
 the sight of lover feedeth those in love . 
 bring us to thi sight , and you shall say 
 i 'll prove a busi actor in their play . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 anoth part of the forest 
 
 enter silviu and phebe 
 
 silviu . sweet phebe , do not scorn me ; do not , phebe . 
 say that you love me not ; but say not so 
 in bitter . the common execution , 
 whose heart th ' accustom 'd sight of death make hard , 
 fall not the axe upon the humbl neck 
 but first beg pardon . will you sterner be 
 than he that die and live by bloodi drop ? 
 
 enter rosalind , celia , and corin , at a distanc 
 
 phebe . i would not be thi execution ; 
 i fli thee , for i would not injur thee . 
 thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye . 
 't is pretti , sure , and veri probabl , 
 that eye , that are the frail'st and softest thing , 
 who shut their coward gate on atomi , 
 should be call 'd tyrant , butcher , murder ! 
 now i do frown on thee with all my heart ; 
 and if mine eye can wound , now let them kill thee . 
 now counterfeit to swoon ; whi , now fall down ; 
 or , if thou canst not , o , for shame , for shame , 
 lie not , to say mine eye are murder . 
 now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee . 
 scratch thee but with a pin , and there remain 
 some scar of it ; lean upon a rush , 
 the cicatric and capabl impressur 
 thi palm some moment keep ; but now mine eye , 
 which i have dart at thee , hurt thee not ; 
 nor , i am sure , there is not forc in eye 
 that can do hurt . 
 silviu . o dear phebe , 
 if ever- as that ever may be near- 
 you meet in some fresh cheek the power of fanci , 
 then shall you know the wound invis 
 that love 's keen arrow make . 
 phebe . but till that time 
 come not thou near me ; and when that time come , 
 afflict me with thi mock , piti me not ; 
 as till that time i shall not piti thee . 
 rosalind . [ advanc ] and whi , i pray you ? who might be your 
 mother , 
 that you insult , exult , and all at onc , 
 over the wretch ? what though you have no beauty- 
 as , by my faith , i see no more in you 
 than without candl may go dark to bed- 
 must you be therefor proud and pitiless ? 
 whi , what mean thi ? whi do you look on me ? 
 i see no more in you than in the ordinari 
 of natur 's sale-work . 'od 's my littl life , 
 i think she mean to tangl my eye too ! 
 no faith , proud mistress , hope not after it ; 
 't is not your inki brow , your black silk hair , 
 your bugl eyebal , nor your cheek of cream , 
 that can entam my spirit to your worship . 
 you foolish shepherd , wherefor do you follow her , 
 like foggi south , puf with wind and rain ? 
 you are a thousand time a proper man 
 than she a woman . 't is such fool as you 
 that make the world full of ill-favour 'd children . 
 't is not her glass , but you , that flatter her ; 
 and out of you she see herself more proper 
 than ani of her lineament can show her . 
 but , mistress , know yourself . down on your knee , 
 and thank heaven , fast , for a good man 's love ; 
 for i must tell you friendli in your ear : 
 sell when you can ; you are not for all market . 
 cri the man merci , love him , take hi offer ; 
 foul is most foul , be foul to be a scoffer . 
 so take her to thee , shepherd . fare you well . 
 phebe . sweet youth , i pray you chide a year togeth ; 
 i had rather hear you chide than thi man woo . 
 rosalind . he 's fall'n in love with your foul , and she 'll fall 
 in love with my anger . if it be so , as fast as she answer thee 
 with frown look , i 'll sauc her with bitter word . whi look 
 you so upon me ? 
 phebe . for no ill will i bear you . 
 rosalind . i pray you do not fall in love with me , 
 for i am falser than vow made in wine ; 
 besid , i like you not . if you will know my hous , 
 't is at the tuft of oliv here hard by . 
 will you go , sister ? shepherd , pli her hard . 
 come , sister . shepherdess , look on him better , 
 and be not proud ; though all the world could see , 
 none could be so abu 'd in sight as he . 
 come , to our flock . exeunt rosalind , celia , and corin 
 phebe . dead shepherd , now i find thi saw of might : 
 'who ever lov 'd that lov 'd not at first sight ? ' 
 silviu . sweet phebe . 
 phebe . ha ! what say'st thou , silviu ? 
 silviu . sweet phebe , piti me . 
 phebe . whi , i arn sorri for thee , gentl silviu . 
 silviu . wherev sorrow is , relief would be . 
 if you do sorrow at my grief in love , 
 by give love , your sorrow and my grief 
 were both extermin 'd . 
 phebe . thou hast my love ; is not that neighbourli ? 
 silviu . i would have you . 
 phebe . whi , that were covet . 
 silviu , the time wa that i hate thee ; 
 and yet it is not that i bear thee love ; 
 but sinc that thou canst talk of love so well , 
 thi compani , which erst wa irksom to me , 
 i will endur ; and i 'll employ thee too . 
 but do not look for further recompens 
 than thine own glad that thou art employ 'd . 
 silviu . so holi and so perfect is my love , 
 and i in such a poverti of grace , 
 that i shall think it a most plenteou crop 
 to glean the broken ear after the man 
 that the main harvest reap ; loos now and then 
 a scatt'r smile , and that i 'll live upon . 
 phebe . know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhil ? 
 silviu . not veri well ; but i have met him oft ; 
 and he hath bought the cottag and the bound 
 that the old carlot onc wa master of . 
 phebe . think not i love him , though i ask for him ; 
 't is but a peevish boy ; yet he talk well . 
 but what care i for word ? yet word do well 
 when he that speak them pleas those that hear . 
 it is a pretti youth- not veri pretti ; 
 but , sure , he 's proud ; and yet hi pride becom him . 
 he 'll make a proper man . the best thing in him 
 is hi complexion ; and faster than hi tongu 
 did make offenc , hi eye did heal it up . 
 he is not veri tall ; yet for hi year he 's tall ; 
 hi leg is but so-so ; and yet 't is well . 
 there wa a pretti red in hi lip , 
 a littl riper and more lusti red 
 than that mix 'd in hi cheek ; 't wa just the differ 
 betwixt the constant red and mingl damask . 
 there be some women , silviu , had they mark 'd him 
 in parcel as i did , would have gone near 
 to fall in love with him ; but , for my part , 
 i love him not , nor hate him not ; and yet 
 i have more caus to hate him than to love him ; 
 for what had he to do to chide at me ? 
 he said mine eye were black , and my hair black , 
 and , now i am rememb'r , scorn 'd at me . 
 i marvel whi i answer 'd not again ; 
 but that 's all one : omitt is no quittanc . 
 i 'll write to him a veri taunt letter , 
 and thou shalt bear it ; wilt thou , silviu ? 
 silviu . phebe , with all my heart . 
 phebe . i 'll write it straight ; 
 the matter 's in my head and in my heart ; 
 i will be bitter with him and pass short . 
 go with me , silviu . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the forest 
 
 enter rosalind , celia , and jaqu 
 
 jaqu . i prithe , pretti youth , let me be better acquaint with 
 thee . 
 rosalind . they say you are a melancholi fellow . 
 jaqu . i am so ; i do love it better than laugh . 
 rosalind . those that are in extrem of either are abomin 
 fellow , and betray themselv to everi modern censur wors than 
 drunkard . 
 jaqu . whi , 't is good to be sad and say noth . 
 rosalind . whi then , 't is good to be a post . 
 jaqu . i have neither the scholar 's melancholi , which is 
 emul ; nor the musician 's , which is fantast ; nor the 
 courtier 's , which is proud ; nor the soldier 's , which is 
 ambiti ; nor the lawyer 's , which is polit ; nor the ladi 's , 
 which is nice ; nor the lover 's , which is all these ; but it is a 
 melancholi of mine own , compound of mani simpl , extract 
 from mani object , and , inde , the sundri contempl of my 
 travel ; in which my often rumin wrap me in a most humor 
 sad . 
 rosalind . a travel ! by my faith , you have great reason to be 
 sad . i fear you have sold your own land to see other men 's ; then 
 to have seen much and to have noth is to have rich eye and 
 poor hand . 
 jaqu . ye , i have gain 'd my experi . 
 
 enter orlando 
 
 rosalind . and your experi make you sad . i had rather have a 
 fool to make me merri than experi to make me sad- and to 
 travel for it too . 
 orlando . good day , and happi , dear rosalind ! 
 jaqu . nay , then , god buy you , an you talk in blank vers . 
 rosalind . farewel , monsieur travel ; look you lisp and wear 
 strang suit , disabl all the benefit of your own countri , be 
 out of love with your nativ , and almost chide god for make 
 you that counten you are ; or i will scarc think you have 
 swam in a gondola . [ exit jaqu ] whi , how now , orlando ! where 
 have you been all thi while ? you a lover ! an you serv me such 
 anoth trick , never come in my sight more . 
 orlando . my fair rosalind , i come within an hour of my promis . 
 rosalind . break an hour 's promis in love ! he that will divid a 
 minut into a thousand part , and break but a part of the 
 thousand part of a minut in the affair of love , it may be said 
 of him that cupid hath clapp 'd him o ' th ' shoulder , but i 'll 
 warrant him heart-whol . 
 orlando . pardon me , dear rosalind . 
 rosalind . nay , an you be so tardi , come no more in my sight . i had 
 as lief be woo 'd of a snail . 
 orlando . of a snail ! 
 rosalind . ay , of a snail ; for though he come slowli , he carri 
 hi hous on hi head- a better jointur , i think , than you make 
 a woman ; besid , he bring hi destini with him . 
 orlando . what 's that ? 
 rosalind . whi , horn ; which such as you are fain to be behold to 
 your wive for ; but he come arm in hi fortun , and prevent 
 the slander of hi wife . 
 orlando . virtu is no horn-mak ; and my rosalind is virtuou . 
 rosalind . and i am your rosalind . 
 celia . it pleas him to call you so ; but he hath a rosalind of a 
 better leer than you . 
 rosalind . come , woo me , woo me ; for now i am in a holiday humour , 
 and like enough to consent . what would you say to me now , an i 
 were your veri veri rosalind ? 
 orlando . i would kiss befor i spoke . 
 rosalind . nay , you were better speak first ; and when you were 
 gravel 'd for lack of matter , you might take occas to kiss . 
 veri good orat , when they are out , they will spit ; and for 
 lover lacking- god warn us ! - matter , the cleanliest shift is to 
 kiss . 
 orlando . how if the kiss be deni ? 
 rosalind . then she put you to entreati , and there begin new 
 matter . 
 orlando . who could be out , be befor hi belov mistress ? 
 rosalind . marri , that should you , if i were your mistress ; or i 
 should think my honesti ranker than my wit . 
 orlando . what , of my suit ? 
 rosalind . not out of your apparel , and yet out of your suit . 
 am not i your rosalind ? 
 orlando . i take some joy to say you are , becaus i would be talk 
 of her . 
 rosalind . well , in her person , i say i will not have you . 
 orlando . then , in mine own person , i die . 
 rosalind . no , faith , die by attorney . the poor world is almost six 
 thousand year old , and in all thi time there wa not ani man 
 die in hi own person , videlicet , in a love-caus . troilu had 
 hi brain dash 'd out with a grecian club ; yet he did what he 
 could to die befor , and he is one of the pattern of love . 
 leander , he would have liv 'd mani a fair year , though hero had 
 turn 'd nun , if it had not been for a hot midsumm night ; for , 
 good youth , he went but forth to wash him in the hellespont , and , 
 be taken with the cramp , wa drown 'd ; and the foolish 
 chronicl of that age found it was- hero of sesto . but these 
 are all lie : men have die from time to time , and worm have 
 eaten them , but not for love . 
 orlando . i would not have my right rosalind of thi mind ; for , i 
 protest , her frown might kill me . 
 rosalind . by thi hand , it will not kill a fli . but come , now i 
 will be your rosalind in a more coming-on disposit ; and ask me 
 what you will , i will grant it . 
 orlando . then love me , rosalind . 
 rosalind . ye , faith , will i , friday and saturday , and all . 
 orlando . and wilt thou have me ? 
 rosalind . ay , and twenti such . 
 orlando . what sayest thou ? 
 rosalind . are you not good ? 
 orlando . i hope so . 
 rosalind . whi then , can one desir too much of a good thing ? come , 
 sister , you shall be the priest , and marri us . give me your hand , 
 orlando . what do you say , sister ? 
 orlando . pray thee , marri us . 
 celia . i can not say the word . 
 rosalind . you must begin 'will you , orlando'- 
 celia . go to . will you , orlando , have to wife thi rosalind ? 
 orlando . i will . 
 rosalind . ay , but when ? 
 orlando . whi , now ; as fast as she can marri us . 
 rosalind . then you must say ' i take thee , rosalind , for wife . ' 
 orlando . i take thee , rosalind , for wife . 
 rosalind . i might ask you for your commiss ; but- i do take thee , 
 orlando , for my husband . there 's a girl goe befor the priest ; 
 and , certainli , a woman 's thought run befor her action . 
 orlando . so do all thought ; they are wing 'd . 
 rosalind . now tell me how long you would have her , after you have 
 possess 'd her . 
 orlando . for ever and a day . 
 rosalind . say ' a day ' without the 'ever . ' no , no , orlando ; men are 
 april when they woo , decemb when they wed : maid are may when 
 they are maid , but the sky chang when they are wive . i will 
 be more jealou of thee than a barbari cock-pigeon over hi hen , 
 more clamor than a parrot against rain , more new-fangl than 
 an ape , more giddi in my desir than a monkey . i will weep for 
 noth , like diana in the fountain , and i will do that when you 
 are dispo 'd to be merri ; i will laugh like a hyen , and that when 
 thou are inclin 'd to sleep . 
 orlando . but will my rosalind do so ? 
 rosalind . by my life , she will do as i do . 
 orlando . o , but she is wise . 
 rosalind . or els she could not have the wit to do thi . the wiser , 
 the wayward . make the door upon a woman 's wit , and it will out 
 at the casement ; shut that , and 'twill out at the key-hol ; stop 
 that , 'twill fli with the smoke out at the chimney . 
 orlando . a man that had a wife with such a wit , he might say 'wit , 
 whither wilt ? ' rosalind . nay , you might keep that check for it , till you met your 
 wife 's wit go to your neighbour 's bed . 
 orlando . and what wit could wit have to excus that ? 
 rosalind . marri , to say she came to seek you there . you shall never 
 take her without her answer , unless you take her without her 
 tongu . o , that woman that can not make her fault her husband 's 
 occas , let her never nurs her child herself , for she will 
 breed it like a fool ! 
 orlando . for these two hour , rosalind , i will leav thee . 
 rosalind . ala , dear love , i can not lack thee two hour ! 
 orlando . i must attend the duke at dinner ; by two o'clock i will be 
 with thee again . 
 rosalind . ay , go your way , go your way . i knew what you would 
 prove ; my friend told me as much , and i thought no less . that 
 flatter tongu of your won me . 't is but one cast away , and 
 so , come death ! two o'clock is your hour ? 
 orlando . ay , sweet rosalind . 
 rosalind . by my troth , and in good earnest , and so god mend me , and 
 by all pretti oath that are not danger , if you break one jot 
 of your promis , or come one minut behind your hour , i will 
 think you the most pathet break-promis , and the most hollow 
 lover , and the most unworthi of her you call rosalind , that may 
 be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaith . therefor 
 bewar my censur , and keep your promis . 
 orlando . with no less religion than if thou wert inde my 
 rosalind ; so , adieu . 
 rosalind . well , time is the old justic that examin all such 
 offend , and let time tri . adieu . exit orlando 
 celia . you have simpli misu 'd our sex in your love-pr . we must 
 have your doublet and hose pluck 'd over your head , and show the 
 world what the bird hath done to her own nest . 
 rosalind . o coz , coz , coz , my pretti littl coz , that thou didst 
 know how mani fathom deep i am in love ! but it can not be sound ; 
 my affect hath an unknown bottom , like the bay of portug . 
 celia . or rather , bottomless ; that as fast as you pour affect 
 in , it run out . 
 rosalind . no ; that same wick bastard of venu , that wa begot of 
 thought , conceiv 'd of spleen , and born of mad ; that blind 
 rascal boy , that abus everi one 's eye , becaus hi own are 
 out- let him be judg how deep i am in love . i 'll tell thee , 
 aliena , i can not be out of the sight of orlando . i 'll go find a 
 shadow , and sigh till he come . 
 celia . and i 'll sleep . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the forest 
 
 enter jaqu and lord , in the habit of forest 
 
 jaqu . which is he that kill the deer ? 
 lord . sir , it wa i . 
 jaqu . let 's present him to the duke , like a roman conqueror ; and 
 it would do well to set the deer 's horn upon hi head for a 
 branch of victori . have you no song , forest , for thi purpos ? 
 lord . ye , sir . 
 jaqu . sing it ; 't is no matter how it be in tune , so it make nois 
 enough . 
 
 song . 
 
 what shall he have that kill 'd the deer ? 
 hi leather skin and horn to wear . 
 [ the rest shall hear thi burden : ] 
 then sing him home . 
 
 take thou no scorn to wear the horn ; 
 it wa a crest ere thou wast born . 
 thi father 's father wore it ; 
 and thi father bore it . 
 the horn , the horn , the lusti horn , 
 is not a thing to laugh to scorn . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the forest 
 
 enter rosalind and celia 
 
 rosalind . how say you now ? is it not past two o'clock ? 
 and here much orlando ! 
 celia . i warrant you , with pure love and troubl brain , he hath 
 ta'en hi bow and arrow , and is gone forth- to sleep . look , who 
 come here . 
 
 enter silviu 
 
 silviu . my errand is to you , fair youth ; 
 my gentl phebe did bid me give you thi . 
 i know not the content ; but , as i guess 
 by the stern brow and waspish action 
 which she did use as she wa write of it , 
 it bear an angri tenour . pardon me , 
 i am but as a guiltless messeng . 
 rosalind . patienc herself would startl at thi letter , 
 and play the swagger . bear thi , bear all . 
 she say i am not fair , that i lack manner ; 
 she call me proud , and that she could not love me , 
 were man as rare as phoenix . 'od 's my will ! 
 her love is not the hare that i do hunt ; 
 whi write she so to me ? well , shepherd , well , 
 thi is a letter of your own devic . 
 silviu . no , i protest , i know not the content ; 
 phebe did write it . 
 rosalind . come , come , you are a fool , 
 and turn 'd into the extrem of love . 
 i saw her hand ; she ha a leathern hand , 
 a freestone-colour 'd hand ; i verili did think 
 that her old glove were on , but 't wa her hand ; 
 she ha a huswif 's hand- but that 's no matter . 
 i say she never did invent thi letter : 
 thi is a man 's invent , and hi hand . 
 silviu . sure , it is her . 
 rosalind . whi , 't is a boister and a cruel style ; 
 a style for challeng . whi , she defi me , 
 like turk to christian . women 's gentl brain 
 could not drop forth such giant-rud invent , 
 such ethiop word , blacker in their effect 
 than in their counten . will you hear the letter ? 
 silviu . so pleas you , for i never heard it yet ; 
 yet heard too much of phebe 's cruelti . 
 rosalind . she phebe me : mark how the tyrant write . 
 [ read ] 
 
 'art thou god to shepherd turn 'd , 
 that a maiden 's heart hath burn 'd ? ' 
 
 can a woman rail thu ? 
 silviu . call you thi rail ? 
 rosalind . 'whi , thi godhead laid apart , 
 warr'st thou with a woman 's heart ? ' 
 
 did you ever hear such rail ? 
 
 'while the eye of man did woo me , 
 that could do no vengeanc to me . ' 
 
 mean me a beast . 
 
 'if the scorn of your bright eyn 
 have power to rais such love in mine , 
 alack , in me what strang effect 
 would they work in mild aspect ! 
 while you chid me , i did love ; 
 how then might your prayer move ! 
 he that bring thi love to the 
 littl know thi love in me ; 
 and by him seal up thi mind , 
 whether that thi youth and kind 
 will the faith offer take 
 of me and all that i can make ; 
 or els by him my love deni , 
 and then i 'll studi how to die . ' 
 silviu . call you thi chide ? 
 celia . ala , poor shepherd ! 
 rosalind . do you piti him ? no , he deserv no piti . wilt thou love 
 such a woman ? what , to make thee an instrument , and play fals 
 strain upon thee ! not to be endur 'd ! well , go your way to her , 
 for i see love hath made thee tame snake , and say thi to her- 
 that if she love me , i charg her to love thee ; if she will not , 
 i will never have her unless thou entreat for her . if you be a 
 true lover , henc , and not a word ; for here come more compani . 
 exit silviu 
 
 enter oliv 
 
 oliv . good morrow , fair one ; pray you , if you know , 
 where in the purlieu of thi forest stand 
 a sheep-cot fenc 'd about with oliv tree ? 
 celia . west of thi place , down in the neighbour bottom . 
 the rank of osier by the murmur stream 
 left on your right hand bring you to the place . 
 but at thi hour the hous doth keep itself ; 
 there 's none within . 
 oliv . if that an eye may profit by a tongu , 
 then should i know you by description- 
 such garment , and such year : 'the boy is fair , 
 of femal favour , and bestow himself 
 like a ripe sister ; the woman low , 
 and browner than her brother . ' are not you 
 the owner of the hous i did inquir for ? 
 celia . it is no boast , be ask 'd , to say we are . 
 oliv . orlando doth commend him to you both ; 
 and to that youth he call hi rosalind 
 he send thi bloodi napkin . are you he ? 
 rosalind . i am . what must we understand by thi ? 
 oliv . some of my shame ; if you will know of me 
 what man i am , and how , and whi , and where , 
 thi handkerch wa stain 'd . 
 celia . i pray you , tell it . 
 oliv . when last the young orlando part from you , 
 he left a promis to return again 
 within an hour ; and , pace through the forest , 
 chew the food of sweet and bitter fanci , 
 lo , what befel ! he threw hi eye asid , 
 and mark what object did present itself . 
 under an oak , whose bough were moss 'd with age , 
 and high top bald with dri antiqu , 
 a wretch rag man , o'ergrown with hair , 
 lay sleep on hi back . about hi neck 
 a green and gild snake had wreath 'd itself , 
 who with her head nimbl in threat approach 'd 
 the open of hi mouth ; but suddenli , 
 see orlando , it unlink 'd itself , 
 and with indent glide did slip away 
 into a bush ; under which bush 's shade 
 a lioness , with udder all drawn dri , 
 lay couch , head on ground , with catlik watch , 
 when that the sleep man should stir ; for 't is 
 the royal disposit of that beast 
 to prey on noth that doth seem as dead . 
 thi seen , orlando did approach the man , 
 and found it wa hi brother , hi elder brother . 
 celia . o , i have heard him speak of that same brother ; 
 and he did render him the most unnatur 
 that liv 'd amongst men . 
 oliv . and well he might so do , 
 for well i know he wa unnatur . 
 rosalind . but , to orlando : did he leav him there , 
 food to the suck 'd and hungri lioness ? 
 oliv . twice did he turn hi back , and purpo 'd so ; 
 but kind , nobler ever than reveng , 
 and natur , stronger than hi just occas , 
 made him give battl to the lioness , 
 who quickli fell befor him ; in which hurtl 
 from miser slumber i awak 'd . 
 celia . are you hi brother ? 
 rosalind . was't you he rescu 'd ? 
 celia . was't you that did so oft contriv to kill him ? 
 oliv . 't wa i ; but 't is not i. i do not shame 
 to tell you what i wa , sinc my convers 
 so sweetli tast , be the thing i am . 
 rosalind . but for the bloodi napkin ? 
 oliv . by and by . 
 when from the first to last , betwixt us two , 
 tear our recount had most kindli bath 'd , 
 as how i came into that desert place- 
 in brief , he led me to the gentl duke , 
 who gave me fresh array and entertain , 
 commit me unto my brother 's love ; 
 who led me instantli unto hi cave , 
 there stripp 'd himself , and here upon hi arm 
 the lioness had torn some flesh away , 
 which all thi while had bled ; and now he faint , 
 and cri , in faint , upon rosalind . 
 brief , i recov 'd him , bound up hi wound , 
 and , after some small space , be strong at heart , 
 he sent me hither , stranger as i am , 
 to tell thi stori , that you might excus 
 hi broken promis , and to give thi napkin , 
 dy 'd in hi blood , unto the shepherd youth 
 that he in sport doth call hi rosalind . 
 [ rosalind swoon ] 
 celia . whi , how now , ganymed ! sweet ganymed ! 
 oliv . mani will swoon when they do look on blood . 
 celia . there is more in it . cousin ganymed ! 
 oliv . look , he recov . 
 rosalind . i would i were at home . 
 celia . we 'll lead you thither . 
 i pray you , will you take him by the arm ? 
 oliv . be of good cheer , youth . you a man ! 
 you lack a man 's heart . 
 rosalind . i do so , i confess it . ah , sirrah , a bodi would think 
 thi wa well counterfeit . i pray you tell your brother how 
 well i counterfeit . heigh-ho ! 
 oliv . thi wa not counterfeit ; there is too great testimoni in 
 your complexion that it wa a passion of earnest . 
 rosalind . counterfeit , i assur you . 
 oliv . well then , take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man . 
 rosalind . so i do ; but , i ' faith , i should have been a woman by 
 right . 
 celia . come , you look paler and paler ; pray you draw homeward . 
 good sir , go with us . 
 oliv . that will i , for i must bear answer back 
 how you excus my brother , rosalind . 
 rosalind . i shall devis someth ; but , i pray you , commend my 
 counterfeit to him . will you go ? exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the forest 
 
 enter touchston and audrey 
 
 touchston . we shall find a time , audrey ; patienc , gentl audrey . 
 audrey . faith , the priest wa good enough , for all the old 
 gentleman 's say . 
 touchston . a most wick sir oliv , audrey , a most vile martext . 
 but , audrey , there is a youth here in the forest lay claim to 
 you . 
 audrey . ay , i know who 't is ; he hath no interest in me in the 
 world ; here come the man you mean . 
 
 enter william 
 
 touchston . it is meat and drink to me to see a clown . by my troth , 
 we that have good wit have much to answer for : we shall be 
 flout ; we can not hold . 
 william . good ev'n , audrey . 
 audrey . god ye good ev'n , william . 
 william . and good ev'n to you , sir . 
 touchston . good ev'n , gentl friend . cover thi head , cover thi 
 head ; nay , prithe be cover 'd . how old are you , friend ? 
 william . five and twenti , sir . 
 touchston . a ripe age . is thi name william ? 
 william . william , sir . 
 touchston . a fair name . wast born i ' th ' forest here ? 
 william . ay , sir , i thank god . 
 touchston . 'thank god . ' a good answer . 
 art rich ? 
 william . faith , sir , so so . 
 touchston . 'so so ' is good , veri good , veri excel good ; and 
 yet it is not ; it is but so so . art thou wise ? 
 william . ay , sir , i have a pretti wit . 
 touchston . whi , thou say'st well . i do now rememb a say : 'the 
 fool doth think he is wise , but the wise man know himself to be 
 a fool . ' the heathen philosoph , when he had a desir to eat a 
 grape , would open hi lip when he put it into hi mouth ; mean 
 therebi that grape were made to eat and lip to open . you do 
 love thi maid ? 
 william . i do , sir . 
 touchston . give me your hand . art thou learn ? 
 william . no , sir . 
 touchston . then learn thi of me : to have is to have ; for it is a 
 figur in rhetor that drink , be pour 'd out of cup into a 
 glass , by fill the one doth empti the other ; for all your 
 writer do consent that ips is he ; now , you are not ips , for i 
 am he . 
 william . which he , sir ? 
 touchston . he , sir , that must marri thi woman . therefor , you 
 clown , abandon- which is in the vulgar leave- the society- which 
 in the boorish is company- of thi female- which in the common is 
 woman- which togeth is : abandon the societi of thi femal ; or , 
 clown , thou perishest ; or , to thi better understand , diest ; 
 or , to wit , i kill thee , make thee away , translat thi life into 
 death , thi liberti into bondag . i will deal in poison with thee , 
 or in bastinado , or in steel ; i will bandi with thee in faction ; 
 will o'er-run thee with polici ; i will kill thee a hundr and 
 fifti way ; therefor trembl and depart . 
 audrey . do , good william . 
 william . god rest you merri , sir . exit 
 
 enter corin 
 
 corin . our master and mistress seek you ; come away , away . 
 touchston . trip , audrey , trip , audrey . i attend , i attend . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the forest 
 
 enter orlando and oliv 
 
 orlando . is't possibl that on so littl acquaint you should 
 like her ? that but see you should love her ? and love woo ? 
 and , woo , she should grant ? and will you persev to enjoy 
 her ? 
 oliv . neither call the giddi of it in question , the poverti 
 of her , the small acquaint , my sudden woo , nor her sudden 
 consent ; but say with me , i love aliena ; say with her that she 
 love me ; consent with both that we may enjoy each other . it 
 shall be to your good ; for my father 's hous and all the revenu 
 that wa old sir rowland 's will i estat upon you , and here live 
 and die a shepherd . 
 orlando . you have my consent . let your wed be to-morrow . 
 thither will i invit the duke and all 's content follow . go 
 you and prepar aliena ; for , look you , here come my rosalind . 
 
 enter rosalind 
 
 rosalind . god save you , brother . 
 oliv . and you , fair sister . exit 
 rosalind . o , my dear orlando , how it griev me to see thee wear 
 thi heart in a scarf ! 
 orlando . it is my arm . 
 rosalind . i thought thi heart had been wound with the claw of a 
 lion . 
 orlando . wound it is , but with the eye of a ladi . 
 rosalind . did your brother tell you how i counterfeit to swoon 
 when he show 'd me your handkerch ? 
 orlando . ay , and greater wonder than that . 
 rosalind . o , i know where you are . nay , 't is true . there wa never 
 ani thing so sudden but the fight of two ram and caesar 's 
 thrason brag of ' i came , saw , and overcam . ' for your brother 
 and my sister no sooner met but they look 'd ; no sooner look 'd but 
 they lov 'd ; no sooner lov 'd but they sigh 'd ; no sooner sigh 'd but 
 they ask 'd one anoth the reason ; no sooner knew the reason but 
 they sought the remedy- and in these degre have they made pair 
 of stair to marriag , which they will climb incontin , or els 
 be incontin befor marriag . they are in the veri wrath of 
 love , and they will togeth . club can not part them . 
 orlando . they shall be marri to-morrow ; and i will bid the duke 
 to the nuptial . but , o , how bitter a thing it is to look into 
 happi through anoth man 's eye ! by so much the more shall i 
 to-morrow be at the height of heart-heavi , by how much i 
 shall think my brother happi in have what he wish for . 
 rosalind . whi , then , to-morrow i can not serv your turn for 
 rosalind ? 
 orlando . i can live no longer by think . 
 rosalind . i will weari you , then , no longer with idl talk . know 
 of me then- for now i speak to some purpose- that i know you are 
 a gentleman of good conceit . i speak not thi that you should 
 bear a good opinion of my knowledg , insomuch i say i know you 
 are ; neither do i labour for a greater esteem than may in some 
 littl measur draw a belief from you , to do yourself good , and 
 not to grace me . believ then , if you pleas , that i can do 
 strang thing . i have , sinc i wa three year old , conver 'd 
 with a magician , most profound in hi art and yet not damnabl . 
 if you do love rosalind so near the heart as your gestur cri 
 it out , when your brother marri aliena shall you marri her . i 
 know into what strait of fortun she is driven ; and it is not 
 imposs to me , if it appear not inconveni to you , to set 
 her befor your eye to-morrow , human as she is , and without ani 
 danger . 
 orlando . speak'st thou in sober mean ? 
 rosalind . by my life , i do ; which i tender dearli , though i say i 
 am a magician . therefor put you in your best array , bid your 
 friend ; for if you will be marri to-morrow , you shall ; and to 
 rosalind , if you will . 
 
 enter silviu and phebe 
 
 look , here come a lover of mine , and a lover of her . 
 phebe . youth , you have done me much ungentl 
 to show the letter that i writ to you . 
 rosalind . i care not if i have . it is my studi 
 to seem despit and ungentl to you . 
 you are there follow 'd by a faith shepherd ; 
 look upon him , love him ; he worship you . 
 phebe . good shepherd , tell thi youth what 't is to love . 
 silviu . it is to be all made of sigh and tear ; 
 and so am i for phebe . 
 phebe . and i for ganymed . 
 orlando . and i for rosalind . 
 rosalind . and i for no woman . 
 silviu . it is to be all made of faith and servic ; 
 and so am i for phebe . 
 phebe . and i for ganymed . 
 orlando . and i for rosalind . 
 rosalind . and i for no woman . 
 silviu . it is to be all made of fantasi , 
 all made of passion , and all made of wish ; 
 all ador , duti , and observ , 
 all humbl , all patienc , and impati , 
 all puriti , all trial , all obedi ; 
 and so am i for phebe . 
 phebe . and so am i for ganymed . 
 orlando . and so am i for rosalind . 
 rosalind . and so am i for no woman . 
 phebe . if thi be so , whi blame you me to love you ? 
 silviu . if thi be so , whi blame you me to love you ? 
 orlando . if thi be so , whi blame you me to love you ? 
 rosalind . whi do you speak too , 'whi blame you me to love you ? ' 
 orlando . to her that is not here , nor doth not hear . 
 rosalind . pray you , no more of thi ; 't is like the howl of irish 
 wolv against the moon . [ to silviu ] i will help you if i can . 
 [ to phebe ] i would love you if i could.- to-morrow meet me all 
 togeth . [ to phebe ] i will marri you if ever i marri woman , 
 and i 'll be marri to-morrow . [ to orlando ] i will satisfi you if 
 ever i satisfi man , and you shall be marri to-morrow . [ to 
 silviu ] i will content you if what pleas you content you , and 
 you shall be marri to-morrow . [ to orlando ] as you love 
 rosalind , meet . [ to silviu ] as you love phebe , meet ; - and as i 
 love no woman , i 'll meet . so , fare you well ; i have left you 
 command . 
 silviu . i 'll not fail , if i live . 
 phebe . nor i . 
 orlando . nor i. exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the forest 
 
 enter touchston and audrey 
 
 touchston . to-morrow is the joy day , audr ' y ; to-morrow will we 
 be marri . 
 audrey . i do desir it with all my heart ; and i hope it is no 
 dishonest desir to desir to be a woman of the world . here come 
 two of the banish 'd duke 's page . 
 
 enter two page 
 
 first page . well met , honest gentleman . 
 touchston . by my troth , well met . come sit , sit , and a song . 
 second page . we are for you ; sit i ' th ' middl . 
 first page . shall we clap into't roundli , without hawk , or 
 spit , or say we are hoars , which are the onli prologu 
 to a bad voic ? 
 second page . i'faith , i'faith ; and both in a tune , like two gipsi 
 on a hors . 
 
 song . 
 it wa a lover and hi lass , 
 with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
 that o'er the green corn-field did pass 
 in the spring time , the onli pretti ring time , 
 when bird do sing , hey ding a ding , ding . 
 sweet lover love the spring . 
 
 between the acr of the rye , 
 with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
 these pretti countri folk would lie , 
 in the spring time , & c. 
 
 thi carol they began that hour , 
 with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
 how that a life wa but a flower , 
 in the spring time , & c. 
 
 and therefor take the present time , 
 with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
 for love is crown with the prime , 
 in the spring time , & c. 
 
 touchston . truli , young gentlemen , though there wa no great 
 matter in the ditti , yet the note wa veri untun . 
 first page . you are deceiv 'd , sir ; we kept time , we lost not our 
 time . 
 touchston . by my troth , ye ; i count it but time lost to hear such 
 a foolish song . god buy you ; and god mend your voic . come , 
 audrey . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the forest 
 
 enter duke senior , amien , jaqu , orlando , oliv , and celia 
 
 duke senior . dost thou believ , orlando , that the boy 
 can do all thi that he hath promis ? 
 orlando . i sometim do believ and sometim do not : 
 as those that fear they hope , and know they fear . 
 
 enter rosalind , silviu , and phebe 
 
 rosalind . patienc onc more , while our compact is urg 'd : 
 you say , if i bring in your rosalind , 
 you will bestow her on orlando here ? 
 duke senior . that would i , had i kingdom to give with her . 
 rosalind . and you say you will have her when i bring her ? 
 orlando . that would i , were i of all kingdom king . 
 rosalind . you say you 'll marri me , if i be will ? 
 phebe . that will i , should i die the hour after . 
 rosalind . but if you do refus to marri me , 
 you 'll give yourself to thi most faith shepherd ? 
 phebe . so is the bargain . 
 rosalind . you say that you 'll have phebe , if she will ? 
 silviu . though to have her and death were both one thing . 
 rosalind . i have promi 'd to make all thi matter even . 
 keep you your word , o duke , to give your daughter ; 
 you your , orlando , to receiv hi daughter ; 
 keep your word , phebe , that you 'll marri me , 
 or els , refus me , to wed thi shepherd ; 
 keep your word , silviu , that you 'll marri her 
 if she refus me ; and from henc i go , 
 to make these doubt all even . 
 exeunt rosalind and celia 
 duke senior . i do rememb in thi shepherd boy 
 some live touch of my daughter 's favour . 
 orlando . my lord , the first time that i ever saw him 
 methought he wa a brother to your daughter . 
 but , my good lord , thi boy is forest-born , 
 and hath been tutor 'd in the rudiment 
 of mani desper studi by hi uncl , 
 whom he report to be a great magician , 
 obscur in the circl of thi forest . 
 
 enter touchston and audrey 
 
 jaqu . there is , sure , anoth flood toward , and these coupl are 
 come to the ark . here come a pair of veri strang beast which 
 in all tongu are call 'd fool . 
 touchston . salut and greet to you all ! 
 jaqu . good my lord , bid him welcom . thi is the motley-mind 
 gentleman that i have so often met in the forest . he hath been a 
 courtier , he swear . 
 touchston . if ani man doubt that , let him put me to my purgat . 
 i have trod a measur ; i have flatt'r a ladi ; i have been 
 polit with my friend , smooth with mine enemi ; i have undon 
 three tailor ; i have had four quarrel , and like to have fought 
 one . 
 jaqu . and how wa that ta'en up ? 
 touchston . faith , we met , and found the quarrel wa upon the 
 seventh caus . 
 jaqu . how seventh caus ? good my lord , like thi fellow . 
 duke senior . i like him veri well . 
 touchston . god 'ild you , sir ; i desir you of the like . i press in 
 here , sir , amongst the rest of the countri copul , to swear 
 and to forswear , accord as marriag bind and blood break . a 
 poor virgin , sir , an ill-favour 'd thing , sir , but mine own ; a 
 poor humour of mine , sir , to take that that man els will . rich 
 honesti dwell like a miser , sir , in a poor hous ; as your pearl 
 in your foul oyster . 
 duke senior . by my faith , he is veri swift and sententi . 
 touchston . accord to the fool 's bolt , sir , and such dulcet 
 diseas . 
 jaqu . but , for the seventh caus : how did you find the quarrel on 
 the seventh caus ? 
 touchston . upon a lie seven time removed- bear your bodi more 
 seem , audrey- as thu , sir . i did dislik the cut of a certain 
 courtier 's beard ; he sent me word , if i said hi beard wa not 
 cut well , he wa in the mind it wa . thi is call 'd the retort 
 courteou . if i sent him word again it wa not well cut , he would 
 send me word he cut it to pleas himself . thi is call 'd the quip 
 modest . if again it wa not well cut , he disabl my judgment . 
 thi is call 'd the repli churlish . if again it wa not well cut , 
 he would answer i spake not true . thi is call 'd the reproof 
 valiant . if again it wa not well cut , he would say i lie . thi 
 is call 'd the countercheck quarrelsom . and so to the lie 
 circumstanti and the lie direct . 
 jaqu . and how oft did you say hi beard wa not well cut ? 
 touchston . i durst go no further than the lie circumstanti , nor 
 he durst not give me the lie direct ; and so we measur 'd sword 
 and part . 
 jaqu . can you nomin in order now the degre of the lie ? 
 touchston . o , sir , we quarrel in print by the book , as you have 
 book for good manner . i will name you the degre . the first , 
 the retort courteou ; the second , the quip modest ; the third , the 
 repli churlish ; the fourth , the reproof valiant ; the fifth , the 
 countercheck quarrelsom ; the sixth , the lie with circumst ; 
 the seventh , the lie direct . all these you may avoid but the lie 
 direct ; and you may avoid that too with an if . i knew when seven 
 justic could not take up a quarrel ; but when the parti were 
 met themselv , one of them thought but of an if , as : 'if you 
 said so , then i said so . ' and they shook hand , and swore 
 brother . your if is the onli peace-mak ; much virtu in if . 
 jaqu . is not thi a rare fellow , my lord ? 
 he 's as good at ani thing , and yet a fool . 
 duke senior . he use hi folli like a stalking-hors , and under the 
 present of that he shoot hi wit : 
 
 enter hymen , rosalind , and celia . still music 
 
 hymen . then is there mirth in heaven , 
 when earthli thing made even 
 aton togeth . 
 good duke , receiv thi daughter ; 
 hymen from heaven brought her , 
 yea , brought her hither , 
 that thou mightst join her hand with hi , 
 whose heart within hi bosom is . 
 rosalind . [ to duke ] to you i give myself , for i am your . 
 [ to orlando ] to you i give myself , for i am your . 
 duke senior . if there be truth in sight , you are my daughter . 
 orlando . if there be truth in sight , you are my rosalind . 
 phebe . if sight and shape be true , 
 whi then , my love adieu ! 
 rosalind . i 'll have no father , if you be not he ; 
 i 'll have no husband , if you be not he ; 
 nor ne'er wed woman , if you be not she . 
 hymen . peac , ho ! i bar confus ; 
 't is i must make conclus 
 of these most strang event . 
 here 's eight that must take hand 
 to join in hymen 's band , 
 if truth hold true content . 
 you and you no cross shall part ; 
 you and you are heart in heart ; 
 you to hi love must accord , 
 or have a woman to your lord ; 
 you and you are sure togeth , 
 as the winter to foul weather . 
 while a wedlock-hymn we sing , 
 feed yourselv with question , 
 that reason wonder may diminish , 
 how thu we met , and these thing finish . 
 
 song 
 wed is great juno 's crown ; 
 o bless bond of board and bed ! 
 't is hymen peopl everi town ; 
 high wedlock then be honour . 
 honour , high honour , and renown , 
 to hymen , god of everi town ! 
 
 duke senior . o my dear niec , welcom thou art to me ! 
 even daughter , welcom in no less degre . 
 phebe . i will not eat my word , now thou art mine ; 
 thi faith my fanci to thee doth combin . 
 
 enter jaqu de boy 
 
 jaqu de boy . let me have audienc for a word or two . 
 i am the second son of old sir rowland , 
 that bring these tide to thi fair assembl . 
 duke frederick , hear how that everi day 
 men of great worth resort to thi forest , 
 address 'd a mighti power ; which were on foot , 
 in hi own conduct , purpos to take 
 hi brother here , and put him to the sword ; 
 and to the skirt of thi wild wood he came , 
 where , meet with an old religi man , 
 after some question with him , wa convert 
 both from hi enterpris and from the world ; 
 hi crown bequeath to hi banish 'd brother , 
 and all their land restor 'd to them again 
 that were with him exil 'd . thi to be true 
 i do engag my life . 
 duke senior . welcom , young man . 
 thou offer'st fairli to thi brother ' wed : 
 to one , hi land withheld ; and to the other , 
 a land itself at larg , a potent dukedom . 
 first , in thi forest let us do those end 
 that here were well begun and well begot ; 
 and after , everi of thi happi number , 
 that have endur 'd shrewd day and night with us , 
 shall share the good of our return fortun , 
 accord to the measur of their state . 
 meantim , forget thi new-fall'n digniti , 
 and fall into our rustic revelri . 
 play , music ; and you bride and bridegroom all , 
 with measur heap 'd in joy , to th ' measur fall . 
 jaqu . sir , by your patienc . if i heard you rightli , 
 the duke hath put on a religi life , 
 and thrown into neglect the pompou court . 
 jaqu de boy . he hath . 
 jaqu . to him will i. out of these convertit 
 there is much matter to be heard and learn 'd . 
 [ to duke ] you to your former honour i bequeath ; 
 your patienc and your virtu well deserv it . 
 [ to orlando ] you to a love that your true faith doth merit ; 
 [ to oliv ] you to your land , and love , and great alli 
 [ to silviu ] you to a long and well-deserv bed ; 
 [ to touchston ] and you to wrangl ; for thi love voyag 
 is but for two month victuall'd.- so to your pleasur ; 
 i am for other than for danc measur . 
 duke senior . stay , jaqu , stay . 
 jaqu . to see no pastim i. what you would have 
 i 'll stay to know at your abandon 'd cave . exit 
 duke senior . proceed , proceed . we will begin these rite , 
 as we do trust they 'll end , in true delight . [ a danc ] exeunt 
 
 epilogu 
 epilogu . 
 rosalind . it is not the fashion to see the ladi the epilogu ; but 
 it is no more unhandsom than to see the lord the prologu . if it 
 be true that good wine need no bush , 't is true that a good play 
 need no epilogu . yet to good wine they do use good bush ; and 
 good play prove the better by the help of good epilogu . what a 
 case am i in then , that am neither a good epilogu , nor can not 
 insinu with you in the behalf of a good play ! i am not 
 furnish 'd like a beggar ; therefor to beg will not becom me . my 
 way is to conjur you ; and i 'll begin with the women . i charg 
 you , o women , for the love you bear to men , to like as much of 
 thi play as pleas you ; and i charg you , o men , for the love 
 you bear to women- as i perceiv by your simp'r none of you 
 hate them- that between you and the women the play may pleas . 
 if i were a woman , i would kiss as mani of you as had beard that 
 plea 'd me , complexion that lik 'd me , and breath that i defi 
 not ; and , i am sure , as mani as have good beard , or good face , 
 or sweet breath , will , for my kind offer , when i make curtsi , 
 bid me farewel . 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the comedi of error 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 claudiu , king of denmark . 
 marcellu , offic . 
 hamlet , son to the former , and nephew to the present king . 
 poloniu , lord chamberlain . 
 horatio , friend to hamlet . 
 laert , son to poloniu . 
 voltemand , courtier . 
 corneliu , courtier . 
 rosencrantz , courtier . 
 guildenstern , courtier . 
 osric , courtier . 
 a gentleman , courtier . 
 a priest . 
 marcellu , offic . 
 bernardo , offic . 
 francisco , a soldier 
 reynaldo , servant to poloniu . 
 player . 
 two clown , gravedigg . 
 fortinbra , princ of norway . 
 a norwegian captain . 
 english ambassador . 
 
 getrud , queen of denmark , mother to hamlet . 
 ophelia , daughter to poloniu . 
 
 ghost of hamlet 's father . 
 
 lord , ladi , offic , soldier , sailor , messeng , attend . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene.- elsinor . 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 elsinor . a platform befor the castl . 
 
 enter two sentinels- [ first , ] francisco , [ who pace up and down 
 at hi post ; then ] bernardo , [ who approach him ] . 
 
 ber . who 's there. ? 
 fran . nay , answer me . stand and unfold yourself . 
 ber . long live the king ! 
 fran . bernardo ? 
 ber . he . 
 fran . you come most care upon your hour . 
 ber . 't is now struck twelv . get thee to bed , francisco . 
 fran . for thi relief much thank . 't is bitter cold , 
 and i am sick at heart . 
 ber . have you had quiet guard ? 
 fran . not a mous stir . 
 ber . well , good night . 
 if you do meet horatio and marcellu , 
 the rival of my watch , bid them make hast . 
 
 enter horatio and marcellu . 
 
 fran . i think i hear them . stand , ho ! who is there ? 
 hor . friend to thi ground . 
 mar . and liegemen to the dane . 
 fran . give you good night . 
 mar . o , farewel , honest soldier . 
 who hath reliev 'd you ? 
 fran . bernardo hath my place . 
 give you good night . exit . 
 mar . holla , bernardo ! 
 ber . say- 
 what , is horatio there ? 
 hor . a piec of him . 
 ber . welcom , horatio . welcom , good marcellu . 
 mar . what , ha thi thing appear 'd again to-night ? 
 ber . i have seen noth . 
 mar . horatio say 't is but our fantasi , 
 and will not let belief take hold of him 
 touch thi dread sight , twice seen of us . 
 therefor i have entreat him along , 
 with us to watch the minut of thi night , 
 that , if again thi apparit come , 
 he may approv our eye and speak to it . 
 hor . tush , tush , 'twill not appear . 
 ber . sit down awhil , 
 and let us onc again assail your ear , 
 that are so fortifi against our stori , 
 what we two night have seen . 
 hor . well , sit we down , 
 and let us hear bernardo speak of thi . 
 ber . last night of all , 
 when yond same star that 's westward from the pole 
 had made hi cours t ' illum that part of heaven 
 where now it burn , marcellu and myself , 
 the bell then beat one- 
 
 enter ghost . 
 
 mar . peac ! break thee off ! look where it come again ! 
 ber . in the same figur , like the king that 's dead . 
 mar . thou art a scholar ; speak to it , horatio . 
 ber . look it not like the king ? mark it , horatio . 
 hor . most like . it harrow me with fear and wonder . 
 ber . it would be spoke to . 
 mar . question it , horatio . 
 hor . what art thou that usurp'st thi time of night 
 togeth with that fair and warlik form 
 in which the majesti of buri denmark 
 did sometim march ? by heaven i charg thee speak ! 
 mar . it is offend . 
 ber . see , it stalk away ! 
 hor . stay ! speak , speak ! i charg thee speak ! 
 exit ghost . 
 mar . 't is gone and will not answer . 
 ber . how now , horatio ? you trembl and look pale . 
 is not thi someth more than fantasi ? 
 what think you o n't ? 
 hor . befor my god , i might not thi believ 
 without the sensibl and true avouch 
 of mine own eye . 
 mar . is it not like the king ? 
 hor . as thou art to thyself . 
 such wa the veri armour he had on 
 when he th ' ambiti norway combat . 
 so frown 'd he onc when , in an angri parl , 
 he smote the sled polack on the ice . 
 't is strang . 
 mar . thu twice befor , and jump at thi dead hour , 
 with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch . 
 hor . in what particular thought to work i know not ; 
 but , in the gross and scope of my opinion , 
 thi bode some strang erupt to our state . 
 mar . good now , sit down , and tell me he that know , 
 whi thi same strict and most observ watch 
 so nightli toil the subject of the land , 
 and whi such daili cast of brazen cannon 
 and foreign mart for implement of war ; 
 whi such impress of shipwright , whose sore task 
 doe not divid the sunday from the week . 
 what might be toward , that thi sweati hast 
 doth make the night joint-labour with the day ? 
 who is't that can inform me ? 
 hor . that can i . 
 at least , the whisper goe so . our last king , 
 whose imag even but now appear 'd to us , 
 wa , as you know , by fortinbra of norway , 
 thereto prick 'd on by a most emul pride , 
 dar 'd to the combat ; in which our valiant hamlet 
 ( for so thi side of our known world esteem 'd him ) 
 did slay thi fortinbra ; who , by a seal 'd compact , 
 well ratifi by law and heraldri , 
 did forfeit , with hi life , all those hi land 
 which he stood seiz 'd of , to the conqueror ; 
 against the which a moieti compet 
 wa gage by our king ; which had return 'd 
 to the inherit of fortinbra , 
 had he been vanquish , as , by the same comart 
 and carriag of the articl design 'd , 
 hi fell to hamlet . now , sir , young fortinbra , 
 of unimprov mettl hot and full , 
 hath in the skirt of norway , here and there , 
 shark 'd up a list of lawless resolut , 
 for food and diet , to some enterpris 
 that hath a stomach i n't ; which is no other , 
 as it doth well appear unto our state , 
 but to recov of us , by strong hand 
 and term compulsatori , those foresaid land 
 so by hi father lost ; and thi , i take it , 
 is the main motiv of our prepar , 
 the sourc of thi our watch , and the chief head 
 of thi post-hast and romag in the land . 
 ber . i think it be no other but e'en so . 
 well may it sort that thi portent figur 
 come arm through our watch , so like the king 
 that wa and is the question of these war . 
 hor . a mote it is to troubl the mind 's eye . 
 in the most high and palmi state of rome , 
 a littl ere the mightiest juliu fell , 
 the grave stood tenantless , and the sheet dead 
 did squeak and gibber in the roman street ; 
 as star with train of fire , and dew of blood , 
 disast in the sun ; and the moist star 
 upon whose influenc neptun 's empir stand 
 wa sick almost to doomsday with eclips . 
 and even the like precurs of fierc event , 
 as harbing preced still the fate 
 and prologu to the omen come on , 
 have heaven and earth togeth demonstr 
 unto our climatur and countrymen . 
 
 enter ghost again . 
 
 but soft ! behold ! lo , where it come again ! 
 i 'll cross it , though it blast me.- stay illus ! 
 spread hi arm . 
 if thou hast ani sound , or use of voic , 
 speak to me . 
 if there be ani good thing to be done , 
 that may to thee do eas , and , race to me , 
 speak to me . 
 if thou art privi to thi countri 's fate , 
 which happili foreknow may avoid , 
 o , speak ! 
 or if thou hast uphoard in thi life 
 extort treasur in the womb of earth 
 ( for which , they say , you spirit oft walk in death ) , 
 the cock crow . 
 speak of it ! stay , and speak ! - stop it , marcellu ! 
 mar . shall i strike at it with my partisan ? 
 hor . do , if it will not stand . 
 ber . 't is here ! 
 hor . 't is here ! 
 mar . 't is gone ! 
 exit ghost . 
 we do it wrong , be so majest , 
 to offer it the show of violenc ; 
 for it is as the air , invulner , 
 and our vain blow malici mockeri . 
 ber . it wa about to speak , when the cock crew . 
 hor . and then it start , like a guilti thing 
 upon a fear summon . i have heard 
 the cock , that is the trumpet to the morn , 
 doth with hi lofti and shrill-sound throat 
 awak the god of day ; and at hi warn , 
 whether in sea or fire , in earth or air , 
 th ' extravag and er spirit hie 
 to hi confin ; and of the truth herein 
 thi present object made probat . 
 mar . it fade on the crow of the cock . 
 some say that ever , 'gainst that season come 
 wherein our saviour 's birth is celebr , 
 the bird of dawn singeth all night long ; 
 and then , they say , no spirit dare stir abroad , 
 the night are wholesom , then no planet strike , 
 no fairi take , nor witch hath power to charm , 
 so hallow 'd and so graciou is the time . 
 hor . so have i heard and do in part believ it . 
 but look , the morn , in russet mantl clad , 
 walk o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill . 
 break we our watch up ; and by my advic 
 let us impart what we have seen to-night 
 unto young hamlet ; for , upon my life , 
 thi spirit , dumb to us , will speak to him . 
 do you consent we shall acquaint him with it , 
 as need in our love , fit our duti ? 
 let 's do't , i pray ; and i thi morn know 
 where we shall find him most conveni . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 elsinor . a room of state in the castl . 
 
 flourish . [ enter claudiu , king of denmark , gertrud the queen , hamlet , 
 poloniu , laert and hi sister ophelia , [ voltemand , corneliu , ] 
 lord attend . 
 
 king . though yet of hamlet our dear brother 's death 
 the memori be green , and that it us befit 
 to bear our heart in grief , and our whole kingdom 
 to be contract in one brow of woe , 
 yet so far hath discret fought with natur 
 that we with wisest sorrow think on him 
 togeth with remembr of ourselv . 
 therefor our sometim sister , now our queen , 
 th ' imperi jointress to thi warlik state , 
 have we , as 'twere with a defeat joy , 
 with an auspici , and a drop eye , 
 with mirth in funer , and with dirg in marriag , 
 in equal scale weigh delight and dole , 
 taken to wife ; nor have we herein barr 'd 
 your better wisdom , which have freeli gone 
 with thi affair along . for all , our thank . 
 now follow , that you know , young fortinbra , 
 hold a weak suppos of our worth , 
 or think by our late dear brother 's death 
 our state to be disjoint and out of frame , 
 colleagu with thi dream of hi advantag , 
 he hath not fail 'd to pester us with messag 
 import the surrend of those land 
 lost by hi father , with all band of law , 
 to our most valiant brother . so much for him . 
 now for ourself and for thi time of meet . 
 thu much the busi is : we have here writ 
 to norway , uncl of young fortinbra , 
 who , impot and bedrid , scarc hear 
 of thi hi nephew 's purpos , to suppress 
 hi further gait herein , in that the levi , 
 the list , and full proport are all made 
 out of hi subject ; and we here dispatch 
 you , good corneliu , and you , voltemand , 
 for bearer of thi greet to old norway , 
 give to you no further person power 
 to busi with the king , more than the scope 
 of these dilat articl allow . [ give a paper . ] 
 farewel , and let your hast commend your duti . 
 cor. , volt . in that , and all thing , will we show our duti . 
 king . we doubt it noth . heartili farewel . 
 exeunt voltemand and corneliu . 
 and now , laert , what 's the news with you ? 
 you told us of some suit . what is't , laert ? 
 you can not speak of reason to the dane 
 and lose your voic . what wouldst thou beg , laert , 
 that shall not be my offer , not thi ask ? 
 the head is not more nativ to the heart , 
 the hand more instrument to the mouth , 
 than is the throne of denmark to thi father . 
 what wouldst thou have , laert ? 
 laer . my dread lord , 
 your leav and favour to return to franc ; 
 from whenc though willingli i came to denmark 
 to show my duti in your coron , 
 yet now i must confess , that duti done , 
 my thought and wish bend again toward franc 
 and bow them to your graciou leav and pardon . 
 king . have you your father 's leav ? what say poloniu ? 
 pol . he hath , my lord , wrung from me my slow leav 
 by laboursom petit , and at last 
 upon hi will i seal 'd my hard consent . 
 i do beseech you give him leav to go . 
 king . take thi fair hour , laert . time be thine , 
 and thi best grace spend it at thi will ! 
 but now , my cousin hamlet , and my son- 
 ham . [ asid ] a littl more than kin , and less than kind ! 
 king . how is it that the cloud still hang on you ? 
 ham . not so , my lord . i am too much i ' th ' sun . 
 queen . good hamlet , cast thi night colour off , 
 and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark . 
 do not for ever with thi vail lid 
 seek for thi nobl father in the dust . 
 thou know'st 't is common . all that live must die , 
 pass through natur to etern . 
 ham . ay , madam , it is common . 
 queen . if it be , 
 whi seem it so particular with thee ? 
 ham . seem , madam , nay , it is . i know not 'seem . ' 
 't is not alon my inki cloak , good mother , 
 nor customari suit of solemn black , 
 nor windi suspir of forc 'd breath , 
 no , nor the fruit river in the eye , 
 nor the deject havior of the visag , 
 togeth with all form , mood , shape of grief , 
 'that can denot me truli . these inde seem , 
 for they are action that a man might play ; 
 but i have that within which passeth show- 
 these but the trap and the suit of woe . 
 king . 't is sweet and commend in your natur , hamlet , 
 to give these mourn duti to your father ; 
 but you must know , your father lost a father ; 
 that father lost , lost hi , and the survivor bound 
 in filial oblig for some term 
 to do obsequi sorrow . but to persev 
 in obstin condol is a cours 
 of impiou stubborn . 't is unmanli grief ; 
 it show a will most incorrect to heaven , 
 a heart unfortifi , a mind impati , 
 an understand simpl and unschool 'd ; 
 for what we know must be , and is as common 
 as ani the most vulgar thing to sens , 
 whi should we in our peevish opposit 
 take it to heart ? fie ! 't is a fault to heaven , 
 a fault against the dead , a fault to natur , 
 to reason most absurd , whose common theme 
 is death of father , and who still hath cri , 
 from the first cors till he that die to-day , 
 'thi must be so . ' we pray you throw to earth 
 thi unprevail woe , and think of us 
 as of a father ; for let the world take note 
 you are the most immedi to our throne , 
 and with no less nobil of love 
 than that which dearest father bear hi son 
 do i impart toward you . for your intent 
 in go back to school in wittenberg , 
 it is most retrograd to our desir ; 
 and we beseech you , bend you to remain 
 here in the cheer and comfort of our eye , 
 our chiefest courtier , cousin , and our son . 
 queen . let not thi mother lose her prayer , hamlet . 
 i pray thee stay with us , go not to wittenberg . 
 ham . i shall in all my best obey you , madam . 
 king . whi , 't is a love and a fair repli . 
 be as ourself in denmark . madam , come . 
 thi gentl and unforc 'd accord of hamlet 
 sit smile to my heart ; in grace whereof , 
 no jocund health that denmark drink to-day 
 but the great cannon to the cloud shall tell , 
 and the king 's rous the heaven shall bruit again , 
 respeak earthli thunder . come away . 
 flourish . exeunt all but hamlet . 
 ham . o that thi too too solid flesh would melt , 
 thaw , and resolv itself into a dew ! 
 or that the everlast had not fix 'd 
 hi canon 'gainst self-slaught ! o god ! god ! 
 how weari , stale , flat , and unprofit 
 seem to me all the use of thi world ! 
 fie o n't ! ah , fie ! 't is an unweed garden 
 that grow to seed ; thing rank and gross in natur 
 possess it mere . that it should come to thi ! 
 but two month dead ! nay , not so much , not two . 
 so excel a king , that wa to thi 
 hyperion to a satyr ; so love to my mother 
 that he might not beteem the wind of heaven 
 visit her face too roughli . heaven and earth ! 
 must i rememb ? whi , she would hang on him 
 as if increas of appetit had grown 
 by what it fed on ; and yet , within a month- 
 let me not think o n't ! frailti , thi name is woman ! - 
 a littl month , or ere those shoe were old 
 with which she follow my poor father 's bodi 
 like niob , all tears- whi she , even she 
 ( o god ! a beast that want discours of reason 
 would have mourn 'd longer ) marri with my uncl ; 
 my father 's brother , but no more like my father 
 than i to hercul . within a month , 
 ere yet the salt of most unright tear 
 had left the flush in her gall eye , 
 she marri . o , most wick speed , to post 
 with such dexter to incestu sheet ! 
 it is not , nor it can not come to good . 
 but break my heart , for i must hold my tongu ! 
 
 enter horatio , marcellu , and bernardo . 
 
 hor . hail to your lordship ! 
 ham . i am glad to see you well . 
 horatio ! - or i do forget myself . 
 hor . the same , my lord , and your poor servant ever . 
 ham . sir , my good friend- i 'll chang that name with you . 
 and what make you from wittenberg , horatio ? 
 marcellu ? 
 mar . my good lord ! 
 ham . i am veri glad to see you.- [ to bernardo ] good even , sir.- 
 but what , in faith , make you from wittenberg ? 
 hor . a truant disposit , good my lord . 
 ham . i would not hear your enemi say so , 
 nor shall you do my ear that violenc 
 to make it truster of your own report 
 against yourself . i know you are no truant . 
 but what is your affair in elsinor ? 
 we 'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart . 
 hor . my lord , i came to see your father 's funer . 
 ham . i prithe do not mock me , fellow student . 
 i think it wa to see my mother 's wed . 
 hor . inde , my lord , it follow hard upon . 
 ham . thrift , thrift , horatio ! the funer bak 'd meat 
 did coldli furnish forth the marriag tabl . 
 would i had met my dearest foe in heaven 
 or ever i had seen that day , horatio ! 
 my father- methink i see my father . 
 hor . o , where , my lord ? 
 ham . in my mind 's eye , horatio . 
 hor . i saw him onc . he wa a goodli king . 
 ham . he wa a man , take him for all in all . 
 i shall not look upon hi like again . 
 hor . my lord , i think i saw him yesternight . 
 ham . saw ? who ? 
 hor . my lord , the king your father . 
 ham . the king my father ? 
 hor . season your admir for a while 
 with an attent ear , till i may deliv 
 upon the wit of these gentlemen , 
 thi marvel to you . 
 ham . for god 's love let me hear ! 
 hor . two night togeth had these gentlemen 
 ( marcellu and bernardo ) on their watch 
 in the dead vast and middl of the night 
 been thu encount'r . a figur like your father , 
 arm at point exactli , cap-a-p , 
 appear befor them and with solemn march 
 goe slow and state by them . thrice he walk 'd 
 by their oppress 'd and fear-surpris eye , 
 within hi truncheon 's length ; whilst they distil 'd 
 almost to jelli with the act of fear , 
 stand dumb and speak not to him . thi to me 
 in dread secreci impart they did , 
 and i with them the third night kept the watch ; 
 where , as they had deliv 'd , both in time , 
 form of the thing , each word made true and good , 
 the apparit come . i knew your father . 
 these hand are not more like . 
 ham . but where wa thi ? 
 mar . my lord , upon the platform where we watch 'd . 
 ham . did you not speak to it ? 
 hor . my lord , i did ; 
 but answer made it none . yet onc methought 
 it lift up it head and did address 
 itself to motion , like as it would speak ; 
 but even then the morn cock crew loud , 
 and at the sound it shrunk in hast away 
 and vanish 'd from our sight . 
 ham . 't is veri strang . 
 hor . as i do live , my honour 'd lord , 't is true ; 
 and we did think it writ down in our duti 
 to let you know of it . 
 ham . inde , inde , sir . but thi troubl me . 
 hold you the watch to-night ? 
 both [ mar . and ber . ] we do , my lord . 
 ham . arm 'd , say you ? 
 both . arm 'd , my lord . 
 ham . from top to toe ? 
 both . my lord , from head to foot . 
 ham . then saw you not hi face ? 
 hor . o , ye , my lord ! he wore hi beaver up . 
 ham . what , look 'd he frowningli . 
 hor . a counten more in sorrow than in anger . 
 ham . pale or red ? 
 hor . nay , veri pale . 
 ham . and fix 'd hi eye upon you ? 
 hor . most constantli . 
 ham . i would i had been there . 
 hor . it would have much amaz 'd you . 
 ham . veri like , veri like . stay 'd it long ? 
 hor . while one with moder hast might tell a hundr . 
 both . longer , longer . 
 hor . not when i saw't . 
 ham . hi beard wa grizzled- no ? 
 hor . it wa , as i have seen it in hi life , 
 a sabl silver 'd . 
 ham . i will watch to-night . 
 perchanc 'twill walk again . 
 hor . i warr'nt it will . 
 ham . if it assum my nobl father 's person , 
 i 'll speak to it , though hell itself should gape 
 and bid me hold my peac . i pray you all , 
 if you have hitherto conceal 'd thi sight , 
 let it be tenabl in your silenc still ; 
 and whatsoev els shall hap to-night , 
 give it an understand but no tongu . 
 i will requit your love . so , fare you well . 
 upon the platform , 'twixt eleven and twelv , 
 i 'll visit you . 
 all . our duti to your honour . 
 ham . your love , as mine to you . farewel . 
 exeunt [ all but hamlet ] . 
 my father 's spirit- in arm ? all is not well . 
 i doubt some foul play . would the night were come ! 
 till then sit still , my soul . foul deed will rise , 
 though all the earth o'erwhelm them , to men 's eye . 
 exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 elsinor . a room in the hous of poloniu . 
 
 enter laert and ophelia . 
 
 laer . my necessari are embark 'd . farewel . 
 and , sister , as the wind give benefit 
 and convoy is assist , do not sleep , 
 but let me hear from you . 
 oph . do you doubt that ? 
 laer . for hamlet , and the trifl of hi favour , 
 hold it a fashion , and a toy in blood ; 
 a violet in the youth of primi natur , 
 forward , not permanent- sweet , not last ; 
 the perfum and supplianc of a minut ; 
 no more . 
 oph . no more but so ? 
 laer . think it no more . 
 for natur crescent doe not grow alon 
 in thew and bulk ; but as thi templ wax , 
 the inward servic of the mind and soul 
 grow wide withal . perhap he love you now , 
 and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch 
 the virtu of hi will ; but you must fear , 
 hi great weigh 'd , hi will is not hi own ; 
 for he himself is subject to hi birth . 
 he may not , as unvalu person do , 
 carv for himself , for on hi choic depend 
 the safeti and health of thi whole state , 
 and therefor must hi choic be circumscrib 'd 
 unto the voic and yield of that bodi 
 whereof he is the head . then if he say he love you , 
 it fit your wisdom so far to believ it 
 as he in hi particular act and place 
 may give hi say deed ; which is no further 
 than the main voic of denmark goe withal . 
 then weigh what loss your honour may sustain 
 if with too credent ear you list hi song , 
 or lose your heart , or your chast treasur open 
 to hi unmast'r importun . 
 fear it , ophelia , fear it , my dear sister , 
 and keep you in the rear of your affect , 
 out of the shot and danger of desir . 
 the chariest maid is prodig enough 
 if she unmask her beauti to the moon . 
 virtu itself scope not calumni stroke . 
 the canker gall the infant of the spring 
 too oft befor their button be disclo 'd , 
 and in the morn and liquid dew of youth 
 contagi blastment are most immin . 
 be wari then ; best safeti lie in fear . 
 youth to itself rebel , though none els near . 
 oph . i shall th ' effect of thi good lesson keep 
 as watchman to my heart . but , good my brother , 
 do not as some ungraci pastor do , 
 show me the steep and thorni way to heaven , 
 while , like a puff 'd and reckless libertin , 
 himself the primros path of dallianc tread 
 and reck not hi own rede . 
 laer . o , fear me not ! 
 
 enter poloniu . 
 
 i stay too long . but here my father come . 
 a doubl bless is a doubl grace ; 
 occas smile upon a second leav . 
 pol . yet here , laert ? aboard , aboard , for shame ! 
 the wind sit in the shoulder of your sail , 
 and you are stay 'd for . there- my bless with thee ! 
 and these few precept in thi memori 
 look thou charact . give thi thought no tongu , 
 nor ani unproport 'd thought hi act . 
 be thou familiar , but by no mean vulgar : 
 those friend thou hast , and their adopt tri , 
 grappl them unto thi soul with hoop of steel ; 
 but do not dull thi palm with entertain 
 of each new-hatch 'd , unfledg 'd comrad . bewar 
 of entranc to a quarrel ; but be in , 
 bear't that th ' oppos may bewar of thee . 
 give everi man thine ear , but few thi voic ; 
 take each man 's censur , but reserv thi judgment . 
 costli thi habit as thi purs can buy , 
 but not express 'd in fanci ; rich , not gaudi ; 
 for the apparel oft proclaim the man , 
 and they in franc of the best rank and station 
 are most select and gener , chief in that . 
 neither a borrow nor a lender be ; 
 for loan oft lose both itself and friend , 
 and borrow dull the edg of husbandri . 
 thi abov all- to thine own self be true , 
 and it must follow , as the night the day , 
 thou canst not then be fals to ani man . 
 farewel . my bless season thi in thee ! 
 laer . most humbl do i take my leav , my lord . 
 pol . the time invit you . go , your servant tend . 
 laer . farewel , ophelia , and rememb well 
 what i have said to you . 
 oph . 't is in my memori lock 'd , 
 and you yourself shall keep the key of it . 
 laer . farewel . exit . 
 pol . what is't , ophelia , he hath said to you ? 
 oph . so pleas you , someth touch the lord hamlet . 
 pol . marri , well bethought ! 
 't is told me he hath veri oft of late 
 given privat time to you , and you yourself 
 have of your audienc been most free and bounteou . 
 if it be so- as so 't is put on me , 
 and that in way of caution- i must tell you 
 you do not understand yourself so clearli 
 as it behoov my daughter and your honour . 
 what is between you ? give me up the truth . 
 oph . he hath , my lord , of late made mani tender 
 of hi affect to me . 
 pol . affect ? pooh ! you speak like a green girl , 
 unsift in such peril circumst . 
 do you believ hi tender , as you call them ? 
 oph . i do not know , my lord , what i should think , 
 pol . marri , i will teach you ! think yourself a babi 
 that you have ta'en these tender for true pay , 
 which are not sterl . tender yourself more dearli , 
 or ( not to crack the wind of the poor phrase , 
 run it thu ) you 'll tender me a fool . 
 oph . my lord , he hath importun 'd me with love 
 in honour fashion . 
 pol . ay , fashion you may call it . go to , go to ! 
 oph . and hath given counten to hi speech , my lord , 
 with almost all the holi vow of heaven . 
 pol . ay , spring to catch woodcock ! i do know , 
 when the blood burn , how prodig the soul 
 lend the tongu vow . these blaze , daughter , 
 give more light than heat , extinct in both 
 even in their promis , as it is a-mak , 
 you must not take for fire . from thi time 
 be someth scanter of your maiden presenc . 
 set your entreat at a higher rate 
 than a command to parley . for lord hamlet , 
 believ so much in him , that he is young , 
 and with a larger tether may he walk 
 than may be given you . in few , ophelia , 
 do not believ hi vow ; for they are broker , 
 not of that dye which their invest show , 
 but mere implor of unholi suit , 
 breath like sanctifi and piou bawd , 
 the better to beguil . thi is for all : 
 i would not , in plain term , from thi time forth 
 have you so slander ani moment leisur 
 as to give word or talk with the lord hamlet . 
 look to't , i charg you . come your way . 
 oph . i shall obey , my lord . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 elsinor . the platform befor the castl . 
 
 enter hamlet , horatio , and marcellu . 
 
 ham . the air bite shrewdli ; it is veri cold . 
 hor . it is a nip and an eager air . 
 ham . what hour now ? 
 hor . i think it lack of twelv . 
 mar . no , it is struck . 
 hor . inde ? i heard it not . it then draw near the season 
 wherein the spirit held hi wont to walk . 
 a flourish of trumpet , and two piec go off . 
 what doe thi mean , my lord ? 
 ham . the king doth wake to-night and take hi rous , 
 keep wassail , and the swagg'r upspr reel , 
 and , as he drain hi draught of rhenish down , 
 the kettledrum and trumpet thu bray out 
 the triumph of hi pledg . 
 hor . is it a custom ? 
 ham . ay , marri , is't ; 
 but to my mind , though i am nativ here 
 and to the manner born , it is a custom 
 more honour 'd in the breach than the observ . 
 thi heavy-head revel east and west 
 make us traduc 'd and tax 'd of other nation ; 
 they clip us drunkard and with swinish phrase 
 soil our addit ; and inde it take 
 from our achiev , though perform 'd at height , 
 the pith and marrow of our attribut . 
 so oft it chanc in particular men 
 that , for some viciou mole of natur in them , 
 as in their birth , - wherein they are not guilti , 
 sinc natur can not choos hi origin , - 
 by the o'ergrowth of some complexion , 
 oft break down the pale and fort of reason , 
 or by some habit that too much o'erleaven 
 the form of plausiv manner , that these men 
 carri , i say , the stamp of one defect , 
 be natur 's liveri , or fortun 's star , 
 their virtu else- be they as pure as grace , 
 as infinit as man may undergo- 
 shall in the gener censur take corrupt 
 from that particular fault . the dram of e'il 
 doth all the nobl substanc often dout to hi own scandal . 
 
 enter ghost . 
 
 hor . look , my lord , it come ! 
 ham . angel and minist of grace defend us ! 
 be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn 'd , 
 bring with thee air from heaven or blast from hell , 
 be thi intent wick or charit , 
 thou com'st in such a question shape 
 that i will speak to thee . i 'll call thee hamlet , 
 king , father , royal dane . o , answer me ? 
 let me not burst in ignor , but tell 
 whi thi canoniz 'd bone , hears in death , 
 have burst their cerement ; whi the sepulchr 
 wherein we saw thee quietli inurn 'd , 
 hath op 'd hi ponder and marbl jaw 
 to cast thee up again . what may thi mean 
 that thou , dead cors , again in complet steel , 
 revisit thu the glimps of the moon , 
 make night hideou , and we fool of natur 
 so horridli to shake our disposit 
 with thought beyond the reach of our soul ? 
 say , whi is thi ? wherefor ? what should we do ? 
 ghost beckon hamlet . 
 hor . it beckon you to go away with it , 
 as if it some impart did desir 
 to you alon . 
 mar . look with what courteou action 
 it wave you to a more remov ground . 
 but do not go with it ! 
 hor . no , by no mean ! 
 ham . it will not speak . then will i follow it . 
 hor . do not , my lord ! 
 ham . whi , what should be the fear ? 
 i do not set my life at a pin 's fee ; 
 and for my soul , what can it do to that , 
 be a thing immort as itself ? 
 it wave me forth again . i 'll follow it . 
 hor . what if it tempt you toward the flood , my lord , 
 or to the dread summit of the cliff 
 that beetl o'er hi base into the sea , 
 and there assum some other , horribl form 
 which might depriv your sovereignti of reason 
 and draw you into mad ? think of it . 
 the veri place put toy of desper , 
 without more motiv , into everi brain 
 that look so mani fadom to the sea 
 and hear it roar beneath . 
 ham . it wave me still . 
 go on . i 'll follow thee . 
 mar . you shall not go , my lord . 
 ham . hold off your hand ! 
 hor . be rul 'd . you shall not go . 
 ham . my fate cri out 
 and make each petti artir in thi bodi 
 as hardi as the nemean lion 's nerv . 
 [ ghost beckon . ] 
 still am i call 'd . unhand me , gentlemen . 
 by heaven , i 'll make a ghost of him that let me ! - 
 i say , away ! - go on . i 'll follow thee . 
 exeunt ghost and hamlet . 
 hor . he wax desper with imagin . 
 mar . let 's follow . 't is not fit thu to obey him . 
 hor . have after . to what issu wail thi come ? 
 mar . someth is rotten in the state of denmark . 
 hor . heaven will direct it . 
 mar . nay , let 's follow him . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 elsinor . the castl . anoth part of the fortif . 
 
 enter ghost and hamlet . 
 
 ham . whither wilt thou lead me ? speak ! i 'll go no further . 
 ghost . mark me . 
 ham . i will . 
 ghost . my hour is almost come , 
 when i to sulph'rou and torment flame 
 must render up myself . 
 ham . ala , poor ghost ! 
 ghost . piti me not , but lend thi seriou hear 
 to what i shall unfold . 
 ham . speak . i am bound to hear . 
 ghost . so art thou to reveng , when thou shalt hear . 
 ham . what ? 
 ghost . i am thi father 's spirit , 
 doom 'd for a certain term to walk the night , 
 and for the day confin 'd to fast in fire , 
 till the foul crime done in my day of natur 
 are burnt and purg 'd away . but that i am forbid 
 to tell the secret of my prison hous , 
 i could a tale unfold whose lightest word 
 would harrow up thi soul , freez thi young blood , 
 make thi two eye , like star , start from their sphere , 
 thi knot and combin lock to part , 
 and each particular hair to stand an end 
 like quill upon the fret porpentin . 
 but thi etern blazon must not be 
 to ear of flesh and blood . list , list , o , list ! 
 if thou didst ever thi dear father love- 
 ham . o god ! 
 ghost . reveng hi foul and most unnatur murther . 
 ham . murther ? 
 ghost . murther most foul , as in the best it is ; 
 but thi most foul , strang , and unnatur . 
 ham . hast me to know't , that i , with wing as swift 
 as medit or the thought of love , 
 may sweep to my reveng . 
 ghost . i find thee apt ; 
 and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed 
 that rot itself in eas on leth wharf , 
 wouldst thou not stir in thi . now , hamlet , hear . 
 't is given out that , sleep in my orchard , 
 a serpent stung me . so the whole ear of denmark 
 is by a forg process of my death 
 rankli abu 'd . but know , thou nobl youth , 
 the serpent that did sting thi father 's life 
 now wear hi crown . 
 ham . o my prophet soul ! 
 my uncl ? 
 ghost . ay , that incestu , that adulter beast , 
 with witchcraft of hi wit , with traitor gifts- 
 o wick wit and gift , that have the power 
 so to seduc ! - won to hi shame lust 
 the will of my most seeming-virtu queen . 
 o hamlet , what a falling-off wa there , 
 from me , whose love wa of that digniti 
 that it went hand in hand even with the vow 
 i made to her in marriag , and to declin 
 upon a wretch whose natur gift were poor 
 to those of mine ! 
 but virtu , as it never will be mov 'd , 
 though lewd court it in a shape of heaven , 
 so lust , though to a radiant angel link 'd , 
 will sate itself in a celesti bed 
 and prey on garbag . 
 but soft ! methink i scent the morn air . 
 brief let me be . sleep within my orchard , 
 my custom alway of the afternoon , 
 upon my secur hour thi uncl stole , 
 with juic of curs hebona in a vial , 
 and in the porch of my ear did pour 
 the leper distil ; whose effect 
 hold such an enmiti with blood of man 
 that swift as quicksilverr it cours through 
 the natur gate and alley of the bodi , 
 and with a sudden vigour it doth posset 
 and curd , like eager drop into milk , 
 the thin and wholesom blood . so did it mine ; 
 and a most instant tetter bark 'd about , 
 most lazar-lik , with vile and loathsom crust 
 all my smooth bodi . 
 thu wa i , sleep , by a brother 's hand 
 of life , of crown , of queen , at onc dispatch 'd ; 
 cut off even in the blossom of my sin , 
 unhous'l , disappoint , unanel 'd , 
 no reckon made , but sent to my account 
 with all my imperfect on my head . 
 ham . o , horribl ! o , horribl ! most horribl ! 
 ghost . if thou hast natur in thee , bear it not . 
 let not the royal bed of denmark be 
 a couch for luxuri and damn incest . 
 but , howsoev thou pursuest thi act , 
 taint not thi mind , nor let thi soul contriv 
 against thi mother aught . leav her to heaven , 
 and to those thorn that in her bosom lodg 
 to prick and sting her . fare thee well at onc . 
 the glowworm show the matin to be near 
 and gin to pale hi uneffectu fire . 
 adieu , adieu , adieu ! rememb me . exit . 
 ham . o all you host of heaven ! o earth ! what els ? 
 and shall i coupl hell ? hold , hold , my heart ! 
 and you , my sinew , grow not instant old , 
 but bear me stiffli up . rememb thee ? 
 ay , thou poor ghost , while memori hold a seat 
 in thi distract globe . rememb thee ? 
 yea , from the tabl of my memori 
 i 'll wipe away all trivial fond record , 
 all saw of book , all form , all pressur past 
 that youth and observ copi there , 
 and thi command all alon shall live 
 within the book and volum of my brain , 
 unmix 'd with baser matter . ye , by heaven ! 
 o most pernici woman ! 
 o villain , villain , smile , damn villain ! 
 my tabl ! meet it is i set it down 
 that one may smile , and smile , and be a villain ; 
 at least i am sure it may be so in denmark . [ write . ] 
 so , uncl , there you are . now to my word : 
 it is 'adieu , adieu ! rememb me . ' 
 i have swor n't . 
 hor . ( within ) my lord , my lord ! 
 
 enter horatio and marcellu . 
 
 mar . lord hamlet ! 
 hor . heaven secur him ! 
 ham . so be it ! 
 mar . illo , ho , ho , my lord ! 
 ham . hillo , ho , ho , boy ! come , bird , come . 
 mar . how is't , my nobl lord ? 
 hor . what news , my lord ? 
 mar . o , wonder ! 
 hor . good my lord , tell it . 
 ham . no , you will reveal it . 
 hor . not i , my lord , by heaven ! 
 mar . nor i , my lord . 
 ham . how say you then ? would heart of man onc think it ? 
 but you 'll be secret ? 
 both . ay , by heaven , my lord . 
 ham . there 's neer a villain dwell in all denmark 
 but he 's an arrant knave . 
 hor . there need no ghost , my lord , come from the grave 
 to tell us thi . 
 ham . whi , right ! you are in the right ! 
 and so , without more circumst at all , 
 i hold it fit that we shake hand and part ; 
 you , as your busi and desir shall point you , 
 for everi man hath busi and desir , 
 such as it is ; and for my own poor part , 
 look you , i 'll go pray . 
 hor . these are but wild and whirl word , my lord . 
 ham . i am sorri they offend you , heartili ; 
 ye , faith , heartili . 
 hor . there 's no offenc , my lord . 
 ham . ye , by saint patrick , but there is , horatio , 
 and much offenc too . touch thi vision here , 
 it is an honest ghost , that let me tell you . 
 for your desir to know what is between us , 
 o'ermaster't as you may . and now , good friend , 
 as you are friend , scholar , and soldier , 
 give me one poor request . 
 hor . what is't , my lord ? we will . 
 ham . never make known what you have seen to-night . 
 both . my lord , we will not . 
 ham . nay , but swear't . 
 hor . in faith , 
 my lord , not i . 
 mar . nor i , my lord- in faith . 
 ham . upon my sword . 
 mar . we have sworn , my lord , alreadi . 
 ham . inde , upon my sword , inde . 
 
 ghost cri under the stage . 
 
 ghost . swear . 
 ham . aha boy , say'st thou so ? art thou there , truepenni ? 
 come on ! you hear thi fellow in the cellarag . 
 consent to swear . 
 hor . propos the oath , my lord . 
 ham . never to speak of thi that you have seen . 
 swear by my sword . 
 ghost . [ beneath ] swear . 
 ham . hic et ubiqu ? then we 'll shift our ground . 
 come hither , gentlemen , 
 and lay your hand again upon my sword . 
 never to speak of thi that you have heard : 
 swear by my sword . 
 ghost . [ beneath ] swear by hi sword . 
 ham . well said , old mole ! canst work i ' th ' earth so fast ? 
 a worthi pioner ! onc more remov , good friend . '' 
 hor . o day and night , but thi is wondrou strang ! 
 ham . and therefor as a stranger give it welcom . 
 there are more thing in heaven and earth , horatio , 
 than are dreamt of in your philosophi . 
 but come ! 
 here , as befor , never , so help you merci , 
 how strang or odd soe'er i bear myself 
 ( as i perchanc hereaft shall think meet 
 to put an antic disposit on ) , 
 that you , at such time see me , never shall , 
 with arm encumb'r thu , or thi head-shak , 
 or by pronounc of some doubt phrase , 
 as 'well , well , we know , ' or 'we could , an if we would , ' 
 or 'if we list to speak , ' or 'there be , an if they might , ' 
 or such ambigu give out , to note 
 that you know aught of me- thi is not to do , 
 so grace and merci at your most need help you , 
 swear . 
 ghost . [ beneath ] swear . 
 [ they swear . ] 
 ham . rest , rest , perturb spirit ! so , gentlemen , 
 with all my love i do commend me to you ; 
 and what so poor a man as hamlet is 
 may do t ' express hi love and friend to you , 
 god will , shall not lack . let us go in togeth ; 
 and still your finger on your lip , i pray . 
 the time is out of joint . o curs spite 
 that ever i wa born to set it right ! 
 nay , come , let 's go togeth . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 elsinor . a room in the hous of poloniu . 
 
 enter poloniu and reynaldo . 
 
 pol . give him thi money and these note , reynaldo . 
 rey . i will , my lord . 
 pol . you shall do marvel 's wise , good reynaldo , 
 befor you visit him , to make inquir 
 of hi behaviour . 
 rey . my lord , i did intend it . 
 pol . marri , well said , veri well said . look you , sir , 
 enquir me first what dansker are in pari ; 
 and how , and who , what mean , and where they keep , 
 what compani , at what expens ; and find 
 by thi encompass and drift of question 
 that they do know my son , come you more nearer 
 than your particular demand will touch it . 
 take you , as 'twere , some distant knowledg of him ; 
 as thu , ' i know hi father and hi friend , 
 and in part him . ' do you mark thi , reynaldo ? 
 rey . ay , veri well , my lord . 
 pol . 'and in part him , but , ' you may say , 'not well . 
 but if't be he i mean , he 's veri wild 
 addict so and so ' ; and there put on him 
 what forgeri you pleas ; marri , none so rank 
 as may dishonour him- take heed of that ; 
 but , sir , such wanton , wild , and usual slip 
 as are companion note and most known 
 to youth and liberti . 
 rey . as game , my lord . 
 pol . ay , or drink , fenc , swear , quarrel , 
 drab . you may go so far . 
 rey . my lord , that would dishonour him . 
 pol . faith , no , as you may season it in the charg . 
 you must not put anoth scandal on him , 
 that he is open to incontin . 
 that 's not my mean . but breath hi fault so quaintli 
 that they may seem the taint of liberti , 
 the flash and outbreak of a fieri mind , 
 a savag in unreclaim blood , 
 of gener assault . 
 rey . but , my good lord- 
 pol . wherefor should you do thi ? 
 rey . ay , my lord , 
 i would know that . 
 pol . marri , sir , here 's my drift , 
 and i believ it is a fetch of warrant . 
 you lay these slight sulli on my son 
 as 'twere a thing a littl soil 'd i ' th ' work , 
 mark you , 
 your parti in convers , him you would sound , 
 have ever seen in the prenomin crime 
 the youth you breath of guilti , be assur 'd 
 he close with you in thi consequ : 
 'good sir , ' or so , or 'friend , ' or 'gentleman'- 
 accord to the phrase or the addit 
 of man and country- 
 rey . veri good , my lord . 
 pol . and then , sir , doe ' a this- ' a does- what wa i about to say ? 
 by the mass , i wa about to say someth ! where did i leav ? 
 rey . at 'close in the consequ , ' at 'friend or so , ' and 
 gentleman . ' 
 pol . at 'close in the consequence'- ay , marri ! 
 he close thu : ' i know the gentleman . 
 i saw him yesterday , or t'other day , 
 or then , or then , with such or such ; and , as you say , 
 there wa ' a game ; there o'ertook in 's rous ; 
 there fall out at tenni ' ; or perchanc , 
 ' i saw him enter such a hous of sale , ' 
 videlicet , a brothel , or so forth . 
 see you now- 
 your bait of falsehood take thi carp of truth ; 
 and thu do we of wisdom and of reach , 
 with windlass and with assay of bia , 
 by indirect find direct out . 
 so , by my former lectur and advic , 
 shall you my son . you have me , have you not 
 rey . my lord , i have . 
 pol . god b ' wi ' ye , fare ye well ! 
 rey . good my lord ! [ go . ] 
 pol . observ hi inclin in yourself . 
 rey . i shall , my lord . 
 pol . and let him pli hi music . 
 rey . well , my lord . 
 pol . farewel ! 
 exit reynaldo . 
 
 enter ophelia . 
 
 how now , ophelia ? what 's the matter ? 
 oph . o my lord , my lord , i have been so affright ! 
 pol . with what , i ' th ' name of god i 
 oph . my lord , as i wa sew in my closet , 
 lord hamlet , with hi doublet all unbrac 'd , 
 no hat upon hi head , hi stock foul 'd , 
 ungart'r , and down-gyv to hi ankl ; 
 pale as hi shirt , hi knee knock each other , 
 and with a look so piteou in purport 
 as if he had been loos out of hell 
 to speak of horrors- he come befor me . 
 pol . mad for thi love ? 
 oph . my lord , i do not know , 
 but truli i do fear it . 
 pol . what said he ? 
 oph . he took me by the wrist and held me hard ; 
 then goe he to the length of all hi arm , 
 and , with hi other hand thu o'er hi brow , 
 he fall to such perus of my face 
 as he would draw it . long stay 'd he so . 
 at last , a littl shake of mine arm , 
 and thrice hi head thu wave up and down , 
 he rai 'd a sigh so piteou and profound 
 as it did seem to shatter all hi bulk 
 and end hi be . that done , he let me go , 
 and with hi head over hi shoulder turn 'd 
 he seem 'd to find hi way without hi eye , 
 for out o ' door he went without their help 
 and to the last bend their light on me . 
 pol . come , go with me . i will go seek the king . 
 thi is the veri ecstasi of love , 
 whose violent properti fordo itself 
 and lead the will to desper undertak 
 as oft as ani passion under heaven 
 that doe afflict our natur . i am sorri . 
 what , have you given him ani hard word of late ? 
 oph . no , my good lord ; but , as you did command , 
 i did repel hi letter and deni 
 hi access to me . 
 pol . that hath made him mad . 
 i am sorri that with better heed and judgment 
 i had not quot him . i fear 'd he did but trifl 
 and meant to wrack thee ; but beshrew my jealousi ! 
 by heaven , it is as proper to our age 
 to cast beyond ourselv in our opinion 
 as it is common for the younger sort 
 to lack discret . come , go we to the king . 
 thi must be known ; which , be kept close , might move 
 more grief to hide than hate to utter love . 
 come . 
 exeunt . 
 
 scene ii . 
 elsinor . a room in the castl . 
 
 flourish . [ enter king and queen , rosencrantz and guildenstern , cum alii . 
 
 king . welcom , dear rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 moreov that we much did long to see you , 
 the need we have to use you did provok 
 our hasti send . someth have you heard 
 of hamlet 's transform . so i call it , 
 sith nor th ' exterior nor the inward man 
 resembl that it wa . what it should be , 
 more than hi father 's death , that thu hath put him 
 so much from th ' understand of himself , 
 i can not dream of . i entreat you both 
 that , be of so young clay brought up with him , 
 and sinc so neighbour 'd to hi youth and haviour , 
 that you vouchsaf your rest here in our court 
 some littl time ; so by your compani 
 to draw him on to pleasur , and to gather 
 so much as from occas you may glean , 
 whether aught to us unknown afflict him thu 
 that , open 'd , lie within our remedi . 
 queen . good gentlemen , he hath much talk 'd of you , 
 and sure i am two men there are not live 
 to whom he more adher . if it will pleas you 
 to show us so much gentri and good will 
 as to expend your time with us awhil 
 for the suppli and profit of our hope , 
 your visit shall receiv such thank 
 as fit a king 's remembr . 
 ro . both your majesti 
 might , by the sovereign power you have of us , 
 put your dread pleasur more into command 
 than to entreati . 
 guil . but we both obey , 
 and here give up ourselv , in the full bent , 
 to lay our servic freeli at your feet , 
 to be command . 
 king . thank , rosencrantz and gentl guildenstern . 
 queen . thank , guildenstern and gentl rosencrantz . 
 and i beseech you instantli to visit 
 my too much chang son.- go , some of you , 
 and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is . 
 guil . heaven make our presenc and our practic 
 pleasant and help to him ! 
 queen . ay , amen ! 
 exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern , [ with some 
 attend ] . 
 
 enter poloniu . 
 
 pol . th ' ambassador from norway , my good lord , 
 are joy return 'd . 
 king . thou still hast been the father of good news . 
 pol . have i , my lord ? assur you , my good lieg , 
 i hold my duti as i hold my soul , 
 both to my god and to my graciou king ; 
 and i do think- or els thi brain of mine 
 hunt not the trail of polici so sure 
 as it hath us 'd to do- that i have found 
 the veri caus of hamlet 's lunaci . 
 king . o , speak of that ! that do i long to hear . 
 pol . give first admitt to th ' ambassador . 
 my news shall be the fruit to that great feast . 
 king . thyself do grace to them , and bring them in . 
 [ exit poloniu . ] 
 he tell me , my dear gertrud , he hath found 
 the head and sourc of all your son 's distemp . 
 queen . i doubt it is no other but the main , 
 hi father 's death and our o'erhasti marriag . 
 king . well , we shall sift him . 
 
 enter poloniu , voltemand , and corneliu . 
 
 welcom , my good friend . 
 say , voltemand , what from our brother norway ? 
 volt . most fair return of greet and desir . 
 upon our first , he sent out to suppress 
 hi nephew 's levi ; which to him appear 'd 
 to be a prepar 'gainst the polack , 
 but better look 'd into , he truli found 
 it wa against your high ; whereat griev 'd , 
 that so hi sick , age , and impot 
 wa fals born in hand , send out arrest 
 on fortinbra ; which he , in brief , obey , 
 receiv rebuk from norway , and , in fine , 
 make vow befor hi uncl never more 
 to give th ' assay of arm against your majesti . 
 whereon old norway , overcom with joy , 
 give him three thousand crown in annual fee 
 and hi commiss to employ those soldier , 
 so levi as befor , against the polack ; 
 with an entreati , herein further shown , 
 [ give a paper . ] 
 that it might pleas you to give quiet pass 
 through your dominion for thi enterpris , 
 on such regard of safeti and allow 
 as therein are set down . 
 king . it like us well ; 
 and at our more consid 'd time we 'll read , 
 answer , and think upon thi busi . 
 meantim we thank you for your well-took labour . 
 go to your rest ; at night we 'll feast togeth . 
 most welcom home ! exeunt ambassador . 
 pol . thi busi is well end . 
 my lieg , and madam , to expostul 
 what majesti should be , what duti is , 
 whi day is day , night is night , and time is time . 
 were noth but to wast night , day , and time . 
 therefor , sinc breviti is the soul of wit , 
 and tedious the limb and outward flourish , 
 i will be brief . your nobl son is mad . 
 mad call i it ; for , to defin true mad , 
 what is't but to be noth els but mad ? 
 but let that go . 
 queen . more matter , with less art . 
 pol . madam , i swear i use no art at all . 
 that he is mad , 't is true : 't is true 't is piti ; 
 and piti 't is 't is true . a foolish figur ! 
 but farewel it , for i will use no art . 
 mad let us grant him then . and now remain 
 that we find out the caus of thi effect- 
 or rather say , the caus of thi defect , 
 for thi effect defect come by caus . 
 thu it remain , and the remaind thu . 
 perpend . 
 i have a daughter ( have while she is mine ) , 
 who in her duti and obedi , mark , 
 hath given me thi . now gather , and surmis . 
 [ read ] the letter . 
 'to the celesti , and my soul 's idol , the most beautifi 
 ophelia , '- 
 
 that 's an ill phrase , a vile phrase ; 'beautifi ' is a vile 
 phrase . 
 but you shall hear . thu : 
 [ read . ] 
 'in her excel white bosom , these , & c. ' 
 queen . came thi from hamlet to her ? 
 pol . good madam , stay awhil . i will be faith . [ read . ] 
 
 'doubt thou the star are fire ; 
 doubt that the sun doth move ; 
 doubt truth to be a liar ; 
 but never doubt i love . 
 ' o dear ophelia , i am ill at these number ; i have not art to 
 reckon my groan ; but that i love thee best , o most best , believ 
 it . adieu . 
 'thine evermor , most dear ladi , whilst thi machin is to him , 
 hamlet . ' 
 
 thi , in obedi , hath my daughter shown me ; 
 and more abov , hath hi solicit , 
 as they fell out by time , by mean , and place , 
 all given to mine ear . 
 king . but how hath she 
 receiv 'd hi love ? 
 pol . what do you think of me ? 
 king . as of a man faith and honour . 
 pol . i would fain prove so . but what might you think , 
 when i had seen thi hot love on the wing 
 ( as i perceiv 'd it , i must tell you that , 
 befor my daughter told me ) , what might you , 
 or my dear majesti your queen here , think , 
 if i had play 'd the desk or tabl book , 
 or given my heart a wink , mute and dumb , 
 or look 'd upon thi love with idl sight ? 
 what might you think ? no , i went round to work 
 and my young mistress thu i did bespeak : 
 'lord hamlet is a princ , out of thi star . 
 thi must not be . ' and then i prescript gave her , 
 that she should lock herself from hi resort , 
 admit no messeng , receiv no token . 
 which done , she took the fruit of my advic , 
 and he , repuls , a short tale to make , 
 fell into a sad , then into a fast , 
 thenc to a watch , thenc into a weak , 
 thenc to a light , and , by thi declens , 
 into the mad wherein now he rave , 
 and all we mourn for . 
 king . do you think 't is thi ? 
 queen . it may be , veri like . 
 pol . hath there been such a time- i would fain know that- 
 that i have posit said `` ti so , ' 
 when it prov 'd otherwise. ? 
 king . not that i know . 
 pol . [ point to hi head and shoulder ] take thi from thi , if thi 
 be otherwis . 
 if circumst lead me , i will find 
 where truth is hid , though it were hid inde 
 within the centr . 
 king . how may we tri it further ? 
 pol . you know sometim he walk four hour togeth 
 here in the lobbi . 
 queen . so he doe inde . 
 pol . at such a time i 'll loos my daughter to him . 
 be you and i behind an arra then . 
 mark the encount . if he love her not , 
 and he not from hi reason fall'n thereon 
 let me be no assist for a state , 
 but keep a farm and carter . 
 king . we will tri it . 
 
 enter hamlet , read on a book . 
 
 queen . but look where sadli the poor wretch come read . 
 pol . away , i do beseech you , both away 
 i 'll board him present . o , give me leav . 
 exeunt king and queen , [ with attend ] . 
 how doe my good lord hamlet ? 
 ham . well , god-a-merci . 
 pol . do you know me , my lord ? 
 ham . excel well . you are a fishmong . 
 pol . not i , my lord . 
 ham . then i would you were so honest a man . 
 pol . honest , my lord ? 
 ham . ay , sir . to be honest , as thi world goe , is to be one man 
 pick 'd out of ten thousand . 
 pol . that 's veri true , my lord . 
 ham . for if the sun breed maggot in a dead dog , be a god 
 kiss carrion- have you a daughter ? 
 pol . i have , my lord . 
 ham . let her not walk i ' th ' sun . concept is a bless , but not 
 as your daughter may conceiv . friend , look to't . 
 pol . [ asid ] how say you by that ? still harp on my daughter . yet 
 he knew me not at first . he said i wa a fishmong . he is far 
 gone , far gone ! and truli in my youth i suff'r much extrem 
 for love- veri near thi . i 'll speak to him again.- what do you 
 read , my lord ? 
 ham . word , word , word . 
 pol . what is the matter , my lord ? 
 ham . between who ? 
 pol . i mean , the matter that you read , my lord . 
 ham . slander , sir ; for the satir rogu say here that old men 
 have grey beard ; that their face are wrinkl ; their eye 
 purg thick amber and plum-tre gum ; and that they have a 
 plenti lack of wit , togeth with most weak ham . all which , 
 sir , though i most power and potent believ , yet i hold it 
 not honesti to have it thu set down ; for you yourself , sir , 
 should be old as i am if , like a crab , you could go backward . 
 pol . [ asid ] though thi be mad , yet there is a method in't.- 
 will you walk out of the air , my lord ? 
 ham . into my grave ? 
 pol . inde , that is out o ' th ' air . [ asid ] how pregnant sometim 
 hi repli are ! a happi that often mad hit on , which 
 reason and saniti could not so prosper be deliv of . i 
 will leav him and suddenli contriv the mean of meet between 
 him and my daughter.- my honour lord , i will most humbl take 
 my leav of you . 
 ham . you can not , sir , take from me anyth that i will more 
 willingli part withal- except my life , except my life , except my 
 life , 
 
 enter rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 
 pol . fare you well , my lord . 
 ham . these tediou old fool ! 
 pol . you go to seek the lord hamlet . there he is . 
 ro . [ to poloniu ] god save you , sir ! 
 exit [ poloniu ] . 
 guil . my honour 'd lord ! 
 ro . my most dear lord ! 
 ham . my excel good friend ! how dost thou , guildenstern ? ah , 
 rosencrantz ! good lad , how do ye both ? 
 ro . as the indiffer children of the earth . 
 guil . happi in that we are not over-happi . 
 on fortun 's cap we are not the veri button . 
 ham . nor the sole of her shoe ? 
 ro . neither , my lord . 
 ham . then you live about her waist , or in the middl of her 
 favour ? 
 guil . faith , her privat we . 
 ham . in the secret part of fortun ? o ! most true ! she is a 
 strumpet . what news ? 
 ro . none , my lord , but that the world 's grown honest . 
 ham . then is doomsday near ! but your news is not true . let me 
 question more in particular . what have you , my good friend , 
 deserv at the hand of fortun that she send you to prison 
 hither ? 
 guil . prison , my lord ? 
 ham . denmark 's a prison . 
 ro . then is the world one . 
 ham . a goodli one ; in which there are mani confin , ward , and 
 dungeon , denmark be one o ' th ' worst . 
 ro . we think not so , my lord . 
 ham . whi , then 't is none to you ; for there is noth either good 
 or bad but think make it so . to me it is a prison . 
 ro . whi , then your ambit make it one . 't is too narrow for your 
 mind . 
 ham . o god , i could be bound in a nutshel and count myself a 
 king of infinit space , were it not that i have bad dream . 
 guil . which dream inde are ambit ; for the veri substanc of 
 the ambiti is mere the shadow of a dream . 
 ham . a dream itself is but a shadow . 
 ro . truli , and i hold ambit of so airi and light a qualiti that 
 it is but a shadow 's shadow . 
 ham . then are our beggar bodi , and our monarch and outstretch 'd 
 hero the beggar ' shadow . shall we to th ' court ? for , by my 
 fay , i can not reason . 
 both . we 'll wait upon you . 
 ham . no such matter ! i will not sort you with the rest of my 
 servant ; for , to speak to you like an honest man , i am most 
 dread attend . but in the beaten way of friendship , what 
 make you at elsinor ? 
 ro . to visit you , my lord ; no other occas . 
 ham . beggar that i am , i am even poor in thank ; but i thank you ; 
 and sure , dear friend , my thank are too dear a halfpenni . were 
 you not sent for ? is it your own inclin ? is it a free 
 visit ? come , deal justli with me . come , come ! nay , speak . 
 guil . what should we say , my lord ? 
 ham . whi , anything- but to th ' purpos . you were sent for ; and 
 there is a kind of confess in your look , which your modesti 
 have not craft enough to colour . i know the good king and queen 
 have sent for you . 
 ro . to what end , my lord ? 
 ham . that you must teach me . but let me conjur you by the right 
 of our fellowship , by the conson of our youth , by the 
 oblig of our ever-preserv love , and by what more dear a 
 better propos could charg you withal , be even and direct with 
 me , whether you were sent for or no . 
 ro . [ asid to guildenstern ] what say you ? 
 ham . [ asid ] nay then , i have an eye of you.- if you love me , hold 
 not off . 
 guil . my lord , we were sent for . 
 ham . i will tell you whi . so shall my anticip prevent your 
 discoveri , and your secreci to the king and queen moult no 
 feather . i have of late- but wherefor i know not- lost all my 
 mirth , forgon all custom of exercis ; and inde , it goe so 
 heavili with my disposit that thi goodli frame , the earth , 
 seem to me a steril promontori ; thi most excel canopi , the 
 air , look you , thi brave o'erhang firmament , thi majest 
 roof fret with golden fire- whi , it appeareth no other thing 
 to me than a foul and pestil congreg of vapour . what a 
 piec of work is a man ! how nobl in reason ! how infinit in 
 faculti ! in form and move how express and admir ! in 
 action how like an angel ! in apprehens how like a god ! the 
 beauti of the world , the paragon of anim ! and yet to me what 
 is thi quintess of dust ? man delight not me- no , nor woman 
 neither , though by your smile you seem to say so . 
 ro . my lord , there wa no such stuff in my thought . 
 ham . whi did you laugh then , when i said 'man delight not me ' ? 
 ro . to think , my lord , if you delight not in man , what lenten 
 entertain the player shall receiv from you . we cote them 
 on the way , and hither are they come to offer you servic . 
 ham . he that play the king shall be welcome- hi majesti shall 
 have tribut of me ; the adventur knight shall use hi foil and 
 target ; the lover shall not sigh grati ; the humor man shall 
 end hi part in peac ; the clown shall make those laugh whose 
 lung are tickl o ' th ' sere ; and the ladi shall say her mind 
 freeli , or the blank vers shall halt fort . what player are 
 they ? 
 ro . even those you were wont to take such delight in , the 
 tragedian of the citi . 
 ham . how chanc it they travel ? their resid , both in 
 reput and profit , wa better both way . 
 ro . i think their inhibit come by the mean of the late 
 innov . 
 ham . do they hold the same estim they did when i wa in the 
 citi ? are they so follow 'd ? 
 ro . no inde are they not . 
 ham . how come it ? do they grow rusti ? 
 ro . nay , their endeavour keep in the wont pace ; but there is , 
 sir , an eyri of children , littl eyas , that cri out on the top 
 of question and are most tyrann clapp 'd fort . these are now 
 the fashion , and so berattl the common stage ( so they call 
 them ) that mani wear rapier are afraid of goosequil and 
 dare scarc come thither . 
 ham . what , are they children ? who maintain 'em ? how are they 
 escot ? will they pursu the qualiti no longer than they can 
 sing ? will they not say afterward , if they should grow 
 themselv to common player ( as it is most like , if their mean 
 are no better ) , their writer do them wrong to make them exclaim 
 against their own success . 
 ro . faith , there ha been much to do on both side ; and the nation 
 hold it no sin to tarr them to controversi . there wa , for a 
 while , no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player 
 went to cuff in the question . 
 ham . is't possibl ? 
 guil . o , there ha been much throw about of brain . 
 ham . do the boy carri it away ? 
 ro . ay , that they do , my lord- hercul and hi load too . 
 ham . it is not veri strang ; for my uncl is king of denmark , and 
 those that would make mow at him while my father live give 
 twenti , forti , fifti , a hundr ducat apiec for hi pictur in 
 littl . 'sblood , there is someth in thi more than natur , if 
 philosophi could find it out . 
 
 flourish for the player . 
 
 guil . there are the player . 
 ham . gentlemen , you are welcom to elsinor . your hand , come ! th ' 
 appurten of welcom is fashion and ceremoni . let me compli 
 with you in thi garb , lest my extent to the player ( which i 
 tell you must show fairli outward ) should more appear like 
 entertain than your . you are welcom . but my uncle-fath 
 and aunt-moth are deceiv 'd . 
 guil . in what , my dear lord ? 
 ham . i am but mad north-north-west . when the wind is southerli i 
 know a hawk from a handsaw . 
 
 enter poloniu . 
 
 pol . well be with you , gentlemen ! 
 ham . hark you , guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer ! 
 that great babi you see there is not yet out of hi swaddl 
 clout . 
 ro . happili he 's the second time come to them ; for they say an old 
 man is twice a child . 
 ham . i will prophesi he come to tell me of the player . mark it.- 
 you say right , sir ; a monday morn ; twa so inde . 
 pol . my lord , i have news to tell you . 
 ham . my lord , i have news to tell you . when rosciu wa an actor in 
 rome- 
 pol . the actor are come hither , my lord . 
 ham . buzz , buzz ! 
 pol . upon my honour- 
 ham . then came each actor on hi ass- 
 pol . the best actor in the world , either for tragedi , comedi , 
 histori , pastor , pastoral-com , historical-pastor , 
 tragical-histor , tragical-comical-historical-pastor ; scene 
 individ , or poem unlimit . seneca can not be too heavi , nor 
 plautu too light . for the law of writ and the liberti , these are 
 the onli men . 
 ham . o jephthah , judg of israel , what a treasur hadst thou ! 
 pol . what treasur had he , my lord ? 
 ham . whi , 
 
 'one fair daughter , and no more , 
 the which he love pass well . ' 
 
 pol . [ asid ] still on my daughter . 
 ham . am i not i ' th ' right , old jephthah ? 
 pol . if you call me jephthah , my lord , i have a daughter that i 
 love pass well . 
 ham . nay , that follow not . 
 pol . what follow then , my lord ? 
 ham . whi , 
 
 'a by lot , god wot , ' 
 
 and then , you know , 
 
 'it came to pass , as most like it wa . ' 
 
 the first row of the piou chanson will show you more ; for look 
 where my abridg come . 
 
 enter four or five player . 
 
 you are welcom , master ; welcom , all.- i am glad to see thee 
 well.- welcom , good friends.- o , my old friend ? whi , thi face is 
 valanc 'd sinc i saw thee last . com'st ' thou to ' beard me in 
 denmark ? - what , my young ladi and mistress ? by ' r ladi , your 
 ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last by the 
 altitud of a chopin . pray god your voic , like a piec of 
 uncurr gold , be not crack 'd within the ring.- master , you are 
 all welcom . we 'll e'en to't like french falcon , fli at 
 anyth we see . we 'll have a speech straight . come , give us a 
 tast of your qualiti . come , a passion speech . 
 < num > . play . what speech , my good lord ? 
 ham . i heard thee speak me a speech onc , but it wa never act ; 
 or if it wa , not abov onc ; for the play , i rememb , plea 'd 
 not the million , 't wa caviari to the gener ; but it wa ( as i 
 receiv 'd it , and other , whose judgment in such matter cri in 
 the top of mine ) an excel play , well digest in the scene , 
 set down with as much modesti as cun . i rememb one said 
 there were no sallet in the line to make the matter savouri , 
 nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of 
 affect ; but call 'd it an honest method , as wholesom as 
 sweet , and by veri much more handsom than fine . one speech i n't 
 i chiefli lov 'd . 't wa aenea ' tale to dido , and thereabout of it 
 especi where he speak of priam 's slaughter . if it live in 
 your memori , begin at thi line- let me see , let me see : 
 
 'the rug pyrrhu , like th ' hyrcanian beast- ' 
 
 't is not so ; it begin with pyrrhu : 
 
 'the rug pyrrhu , he whose sabl arm , 
 black as hi purpos , did the night resembl 
 when he lay couch in the omin hors , 
 hath now thi dread and black complexion smear 'd 
 with heraldri more dismal . head to foot 
 now is be total gule , horridli trick 'd 
 with blood of father , mother , daughter , son , 
 bak 'd and impast with the parch street , 
 that lend a tyrann and a damn light 
 to their lord 's murther . roast in wrath and fire , 
 and thu o'ers with coagul gore , 
 with eye like carbuncl , the hellish pyrrhu 
 old grandsir priam seek . ' 
 
 so , proceed you . 
 pol . fore god , my lord , well spoken , with good accent and good 
 discret . 
 
 < num > . play . 'anon he find him , 
 strike too short at greek . hi antiqu sword , 
 rebelli to hi arm , lie where it fall , 
 repugn to command . unequ match 'd , 
 pyrrhu at priam drive , in rage strike wide ; 
 but with the whiff and wind of hi fell sword 
 th ' unnerv father fall . then senseless ilium , 
 seem to feel thi blow , with flame top 
 stoop to hi base , and with a hideou crash 
 take prison pyrrhu ' ear . for lo ! hi sword , 
 which wa declin on the milki head 
 of reverend priam , seem 'd i ' th ' air to stick . 
 so , as a paint tyrant , pyrrhu stood , 
 and , like a neutral to hi will and matter , 
 did noth . 
 but , as we often see , against some storm , 
 a silenc in the heaven , the rack stand still , 
 the bold wind speechless , and the orb below 
 as hush as death- anon the dread thunder 
 doth rend the region ; so , after pyrrhu ' paus , 
 arous vengeanc set him new awork ; 
 and never did the cyclop ' hammer fall 
 on mar 's armour , forg 'd for proof etern , 
 with less remors than pyrrhu ' bleed sword 
 now fall on priam . 
 out , out , thou strumpet fortun ! all you god , 
 in gener synod take away her power ; 
 break all the spoke and felli from her wheel , 
 and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven , 
 as low as to the fiend ! 
 
 pol . thi is too long . 
 ham . it shall to the barber 's , with your beard.- prithe say on . 
 he 's for a jig or a tale of bawdri , or he sleep . say on ; come to 
 hecuba . 
 
 < num > . play . 'but who , o who , had seen the mobl queen- ' 
 
 ham . 'the mobl queen ' ? 
 pol . that 's good ! 'mobl queen ' is good . 
 
 < num > . play . 'run barefoot up and down , threat'n the flame 
 with bisson rheum ; a clout upon that head 
 where late the diadem stood , and for a robe , 
 about her lank and all o'erteem loin , 
 a blanket , in the alarm of fear caught up- 
 who thi had seen , with tongu in venom steep 'd 
 'gainst fortun 's state would treason have pronounc 'd . 
 but if the god themselv did see her then , 
 when she saw pyrrhu make malici sport 
 in minc with hi sword her husband 's limb , 
 the instant burst of clamour that she made 
 ( unless thing mortal move them not at all ) 
 would have made milch the burn eye of heaven 
 and passion in the god . ' 
 
 pol . look , whe ' r he ha not turn 'd hi colour , and ha tear in 's 
 eye . prithe no more ! 
 ham . 't is well . i 'll have thee speak out the rest of thi soon.- 
 good my lord , will you see the player well bestow 'd ? do you 
 hear ? let them be well us 'd ; for they are the abstract and brief 
 chronicl of the time . after your death you were better have a 
 bad epitaph than their ill report while you live . 
 pol . my lord , i will use them accord to their desert . 
 ham . god 's bodykin , man , much better ! use everi man after hi 
 desert , and who should scape whip ? use them after your own 
 honour and digniti . the less they deserv , the more merit is in 
 your bounti . take them in . 
 pol . come , sir . 
 ham . follow him , friend . we 'll hear a play to-morrow . 
 exeunt poloniu and player [ except the first ] . 
 dost thou hear me , old friend ? can you play 'the murther of 
 gonzago ' ? 
 < num > . play . ay , my lord . 
 ham . we 'll ha't to-morrow night . you could , for a need , studi a 
 speech of some dozen or sixteen line which i would set down and 
 insert i n't , could you not ? 
 < num > . play . ay , my lord . 
 ham . veri well . follow that lord- and look you mock him not . 
 [ exit first player . ] 
 my good friend , i 'll leav you till night . you are welcom to 
 elsinor . 
 ro . good my lord ! 
 ham . ay , so , god b ' wi ' ye ! 
 [ exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern 
 now i am alon . 
 o what a rogu and peasant slave am i ! 
 is it not monstrou that thi player here , 
 but in a fiction , in a dream of passion , 
 could forc hi soul so to hi own conceit 
 that , from her work , all hi visag wann 'd , 
 tear in hi eye , distract in 's aspect , 
 a broken voic , and hi whole function suit 
 with form to hi conceit ? and all for noth ! 
 for hecuba ! 
 what 's hecuba to him , or he to hecuba , 
 that he should weep for her ? what would he do , 
 had he the motiv and the cue for passion 
 that i have ? he would drown the stage with tear 
 and cleav the gener ear with horrid speech ; 
 make mad the guilti and appal the free , 
 confound the ignor , and amaz inde 
 the veri faculti of eye and ear . 
 yet i , 
 a dull and muddy-mettl rascal , peak 
 like john-a-dream , unpregn of my caus , 
 and can say noth ! no , not for a king , 
 upon whose properti and most dear life 
 a damn 'd defeat wa made . am i a coward ? 
 who call me villain ? break my pate across ? 
 pluck off my beard and blow it in my face ? 
 tweak me by th ' nose ? give me the lie i ' th ' throat 
 as deep as to the lung ? who doe me thi , ha ? 
 'swound , i should take it ! for it can not be 
 but i am pigeon-liv 'd and lack gall 
 to make oppress bitter , or ere thi 
 i should have fat all the region kite 
 with thi slave 's offal . bloodi bawdi villain ! 
 remorseless , treacher , lecher , kindless villain ! 
 o , vengeanc ! 
 whi , what an ass am i ! thi is most brave , 
 that i , the son of a dear father murther 'd , 
 prompt to my reveng by heaven and hell , 
 must ( like a whore ) unpack my heart with word 
 and fall a-curs like a veri drab , 
 a scullion ! 
 fie upo n't ! foh ! about , my brain ! hum , i have heard 
 that guilti creatur , sit at a play , 
 have by the veri cun of the scene 
 been struck so to the soul that present 
 they have proclaim 'd their malefact ; 
 for murther , though it have no tongu , will speak 
 with most miracul organ , i 'll have these player 
 play someth like the murther of my father 
 befor mine uncl . i 'll observ hi look ; 
 i 'll tent him to the quick . if he but blench , 
 i know my cours . the spirit that i have seen 
 may be a devil ; and the devil hath power 
 t ' assum a pleas shape ; yea , and perhap 
 out of my weak and my melancholi , 
 as he is veri potent with such spirit , 
 abus me to damn me . i 'll have ground 
 more rel than thi . the play 's the thing 
 wherein i 'll catch the conscienc of the king . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 elsinor . a room in the castl . 
 
 enter king , queen , poloniu , ophelia , rosencrantz , guildenstern , and lord . 
 
 king . and can you by no drift of circumst 
 get from him whi he put on thi confus , 
 grate so harshli all hi day of quiet 
 with turbul and danger lunaci ? 
 ro . he doe confess he feel himself distract , 
 but from what caus he will by no mean speak . 
 guil . nor do we find him forward to be sound , 
 but with a crafti mad keep aloof 
 when we would bring him on to some confess 
 of hi true state . 
 queen . did he receiv you well ? 
 ro . most like a gentleman . 
 guil . but with much forc of hi disposit . 
 ro . niggard of question , but of our demand 
 most free in hi repli . 
 queen . did you assay him 
 to ani pastim ? 
 ro . madam , it so fell out that certain player 
 we o'erraught on the way . of these we told him , 
 and there did seem in him a kind of joy 
 to hear of it . they are here about the court , 
 and , as i think , they have alreadi order 
 thi night to play befor him . 
 pol . 't is most true ; 
 and he beseech 'd me to entreat your majesti 
 to hear and see the matter . 
 king . with all my heart , and it doth much content me 
 to hear him so inclin 'd . 
 good gentlemen , give him a further edg 
 and drive hi purpos on to these delight . 
 ro . we shall , my lord . 
 exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 king . sweet gertrud , leav us too ; 
 for we have close sent for hamlet hither , 
 that he , as 'twere by accid , may here 
 affront ophelia . 
 her father and myself ( law espial ) 
 will so bestow ourselv that , see unseen , 
 we may of their encount frankli judg 
 and gather by him , as he is behav 'd , 
 if't be th ' afflict of hi love , or no , 
 that thu he suffer for . 
 queen . i shall obey you ; 
 and for your part , ophelia , i do wish 
 that your good beauti be the happi caus 
 of hamlet 's wild . so shall i hope your virtu 
 will bring him to hi wont way again , 
 to both your honour . 
 oph . madam , i wish it may . 
 [ exit queen . ] 
 pol . ophelia , walk you here.- graciou , so pleas you , 
 we will bestow ourselves.- [ to ophelia ] read on thi book , 
 that show of such an exercis may colour 
 your loneliness.- we are oft to blame in thi , 
 't is too much prov 'd , that with devot 's visag 
 and piou action we do sugar o'er 
 the devil himself . 
 king . [ asid ] o , 't is too true ! 
 how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscienc ! 
 the harlot 's cheek , beauti with plast'r art , 
 is not more ugli to the thing that help it 
 than is my deed to my most paint word . 
 o heavi burthen ! 
 pol . i hear him come . let 's withdraw , my lord . 
 exeunt king and poloniu ] . 
 
 enter hamlet . 
 
 ham . to be , or not to be- that is the question : 
 whether 't is nobler in the mind to suffer 
 the sling and arrow of outrag fortun 
 or to take arm against a sea of troubl , 
 and by oppos end them . to die- to sleep- 
 no more ; and by a sleep to say we end 
 the heartach , and the thousand natur shock 
 that flesh is heir to . 't is a consumm 
 devoutli to be wish 'd . to die- to sleep . 
 to sleep- perchanc to dream : ay , there 's the rub ! 
 for in that sleep of death what dream may come 
 when we have shuffl off thi mortal coil , 
 must give us paus . there 's the respect 
 that make calam of so long life . 
 for who would bear the whip and scorn of time , 
 th ' oppressor 's wrong , the proud man 's contum , 
 the pang of despi 'd love , the law 's delay , 
 the insol of offic , and the spurn 
 that patient merit of th ' unworthi take , 
 when he himself might hi quietu make 
 with a bare bodkin ? who would these fardel bear , 
 to grunt and sweat under a weari life , 
 but that the dread of someth after death- 
 the undiscov 'd countri , from whose bourn 
 no travel returns- puzzl the will , 
 and make us rather bear those ill we have 
 than fli to other that we know not of ? 
 thu conscienc doe make coward of us all , 
 and thu the nativ hue of resolut 
 is sickli o'er with the pale cast of thought , 
 and enterpris of great pith and moment 
 with thi regard their current turn awri 
 and lose the name of action.- soft you now ! 
 the fair ophelia ! - nymph , in thi orison 
 be all my sin rememb'r . 
 oph . good my lord , 
 how doe your honour for thi mani a day ? 
 ham . i humbl thank you ; well , well , well . 
 oph . my lord , i have remembr of your 
 that i have long long to re-deliv . 
 i pray you , now receiv them . 
 ham . no , not i ! 
 i never gave you aught . 
 oph . my honour 'd lord , you know right well you did , 
 and with them word of so sweet breath compo 'd 
 as made the thing more rich . their perfum lost , 
 take these again ; for to the nobl mind 
 rich gift wax poor when giver prove unkind . 
 there , my lord . 
 ham . ha , ha ! are you honest ? 
 oph . my lord ? 
 ham . are you fair ? 
 oph . what mean your lordship ? 
 ham . that if you be honest and fair , your honesti should admit no 
 discours to your beauti . 
 oph . could beauti , my lord , have better commerc than with honesti ? 
 ham . ay , truli ; for the power of beauti will sooner transform 
 honesti from what it is to a bawd than the forc of honesti can 
 translat beauti into hi like . thi wa sometim a paradox , 
 but now the time give it proof . i did love you onc . 
 oph . inde , my lord , you made me believ so . 
 ham . you should not have believ 'd me ; for virtu can not so 
 inocul our old stock but we shall relish of it . i love you 
 not . 
 oph . i wa the more deceiv . 
 ham . get thee to a nunneri ! whi wouldst thou be a breeder of 
 sinner ? i am myself indiffer honest , but yet i could accus 
 me of such thing that it were better my mother had not born me . 
 i am veri proud , reveng , ambiti ; with more offenc at my 
 beck than i have thought to put them in , imagin to give 
 them shape , or time to act them in . what should such fellow as i 
 do , crawl between earth and heaven ? we are arrant knave all ; 
 believ none of us . go thi way to a nunneri . where 's your 
 father ? 
 oph . at home , my lord . 
 ham . let the door be shut upon him , that he may play the fool 
 nowher but in 's own hous . farewel . 
 oph . o , help him , you sweet heaven ! 
 ham . if thou dost marri , i 'll give thee thi plagu for thi dowri : 
 be thou as chast as ice , as pure as snow , thou shalt not escap 
 calumni . get thee to a nunneri . go , farewel . or if thou wilt 
 need marri , marri a fool ; for wise men know well enough what 
 monster you make of them . to a nunneri , go ; and quickli too . 
 farewel . 
 oph . o heavenli power , restor him ! 
 ham . i have heard of your paint too , well enough . god hath 
 given you one face , and you make yourselv anoth . you jig , you 
 ambl , and you lisp ; you nicknam god 's creatur and make your 
 wanton your ignor . go to , i 'll no more o n't ! it hath made 
 me mad . i say , we will have no moe marriag . those that are 
 marri already- all but one- shall live ; the rest shall keep as 
 they are . to a nunneri , go . exit . 
 oph . o , what a nobl mind is here o'erthrown ! 
 the courtier 's , scholar 's , soldier 's , eye , tongu , sword , 
 th ' expect and rose of the fair state , 
 the glass of fashion and the mould of form , 
 th ' observ 'd of all observers- quit , quit down ! 
 and i , of ladi most deject and wretch , 
 that suck 'd the honey of hi music vow , 
 now see that nobl and most sovereign reason , 
 like sweet bell jangl , out of tune and harsh ; 
 that unmatch 'd form and featur of blown youth 
 blast with ecstasi . o , woe is me 
 t ' have seen what i have seen , see what i see ! 
 
 enter king and poloniu . 
 
 king . love ? hi affect do not that way tend ; 
 nor what he spake , though it lack 'd form a littl , 
 wa not like mad . there 's someth in hi soul 
 o'er which hi melancholi sit on brood ; 
 and i do doubt the hatch and the disclos 
 will be some danger ; which for to prevent , 
 i have in quick determin 
 thu set it down : he shall with speed to england 
 for the demand of our neglect tribut . 
 hapli the sea , and countri differ , 
 with variabl object , shall expel 
 thi something-settl matter in hi heart , 
 whereon hi brain still beat put him thu 
 from fashion of himself . what think you o n't ? 
 pol . it shall do well . but yet do i believ 
 the origin and commenc of hi grief 
 sprung from neglect love.- how now , ophelia ? 
 you need not tell us what lord hamlet said . 
 we heard it all.- my lord , do as you pleas ; 
 but if you hold it fit , after the play 
 let hi queen mother all alon entreat him 
 to show hi grief . let her be round with him ; 
 and i 'll be plac 'd so pleas you , in the ear 
 of all their confer . if she find him not , 
 to england send him ; or confin him where 
 your wisdom best shall think . 
 king . it shall be so . 
 mad in great one must not unwatch 'd go . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 elsinor . hall in the castl . 
 
 enter hamlet and three of the player . 
 
 ham . speak the speech , i pray you , as i pronounc 'd it to you , 
 trippingli on the tongu . but if you mouth it , as mani of our 
 player do , i had as live the town crier spoke my line . nor do 
 not saw the air too much with your hand , thu , but use all 
 gentli ; for in the veri torrent , tempest , and ( as i may say ) 
 whirlwind of your passion , you must acquir and beget a 
 temper that may give it smooth . o , it offend me to the 
 soul to hear a robusti periwig-p fellow tear a passion to 
 tatter , to veri rag , to split the car of the groundl , who 
 ( for the most part ) are capabl of noth but inexplic dumb 
 show and nois . i would have such a fellow whipp 'd for o'erdo 
 termag . it out-herod herod . pray you avoid it . 
 player . i warrant your honour . 
 ham . be not too tame neither ; but let your own discret be your 
 tutor . suit the action to the word , the word to the action ; with 
 thi special observ , that you o'erstep not the modesti of 
 natur : for anyth so overdon is from the purpos of play , 
 whose end , both at the first and now , wa and is , to hold , as 
 'twere , the mirror up to natur ; to show virtu her own featur , 
 scorn her own imag , and the veri age and bodi of the time hi 
 form and pressur . now thi overdon , or come tardi off , though 
 it make the unskil laugh , can not but make the judici 
 griev ; the censur of the which one must in your allow 
 o'erweigh a whole theatr of other . o , there be player that i 
 have seen play , and heard other prais , and that highli ( not to 
 speak it profan ) , that , neither have the accent of 
 christian , nor the gait of christian , pagan , nor man , have so 
 strut and bellow that i have thought some of natur 's 
 journeymen had made men , and not made them well , they imit 
 human so abomin . 
 player . i hope we have reform 'd that indiffer with us , sir . 
 ham . o , reform it altogeth ! and let those that play your clown 
 speak no more than is set down for them . for there be of them 
 that will themselv laugh , to set on some quantiti of barren 
 spectat to laugh too , though in the mean time some necessari 
 question of the play be then to be consid . that 's villan 
 and show a most piti ambit in the fool that use it . go 
 make you readi . 
 exeunt player . 
 
 enter poloniu , rosencrantz , and guildenstern . 
 
 how now , my lord ? will the king hear thi piec of work ? 
 pol . and the queen too , and that present . 
 ham . bid the player make hast , [ exit poloniu . ] will you two 
 help to hasten them ? 
 both . we will , my lord . exeunt they two . 
 ham . what , ho , horatio ! 
 
 enter horatio . 
 
 hor . here , sweet lord , at your servic . 
 ham . horatio , thou art e'en as just a man 
 as e'er my convers cop 'd withal . 
 hor . o , my dear lord ! 
 ham . nay , do not think i flatter ; 
 for what advanc may i hope from thee , 
 that no revenu hast but thi good spirit 
 to feed and cloth thee ? whi should the poor be flatter 'd ? 
 no , let the candi tongu lick absurd pomp , 
 and crook the pregnant hing of the knee 
 where thrift may follow fawn . dost thou hear ? 
 sinc my dear soul wa mistress of her choic 
 and could of men distinguish , her elect 
 hath scald thee for herself . for thou hast been 
 as one , in suff'r all , that suffer noth ; 
 a man that fortun 's buffet and reward 
 hast ta'en with equal thank ; and blest are those 
 whose blood and judgment are so well commingl 
 that they are not a pipe for fortun 's finger 
 to sound what stop she pleas . give me that man 
 that is not passion 's slave , and i will wear him 
 in my heart 's core , ay , in my heart of heart , 
 as i do thee . someth too much of thi i 
 there is a play to-night befor the king . 
 one scene of it come near the circumst , 
 which i have told thee , of my father 's death . 
 i prithe , when thou seest that act afoot , 
 even with the veri comment of thi soul 
 observ my uncl . if hi occult guilt 
 do not itself unkennel in one speech , 
 it is a damn ghost that we have seen , 
 and my imagin are as foul 
 as vulcan 's stithi . give him heed note ; 
 for i mine eye will rivet to hi face , 
 and after we will both our judgment join 
 in censur of hi seem . 
 hor . well , my lord . 
 if he steal aught the whilst thi play is play , 
 and scape detect , i will pay the theft . 
 
 sound a flourish . [ enter trumpet and kettledrum . danish 
 march . [ enter king , queen , poloniu , ophelia , rosencrantz , 
 guildenstern , and other lord attend , with the guard 
 carri torch . 
 
 ham . they are come to the play . i must be idl . 
 get you a place . 
 king . how fare our cousin hamlet ? 
 ham . excel , i ' faith ; of the chameleon 's dish . i eat the air , 
 promise-cramm 'd . you can not feed capon so . 
 king . i have noth with thi answer , hamlet . these word are not 
 mine . 
 ham . no , nor mine now . [ to poloniu ] my lord , you play 'd onc 
 i ' th ' univers , you say ? 
 pol . that did i , my lord , and wa account a good actor . 
 ham . what did you enact ? 
 pol . i did enact juliu caesar ; i wa kill 'd i ' th ' capitol ; brutu 
 kill 'd me . 
 ham . it wa a brute part of him to kill so capit a calf there . be 
 the player readi . 
 ro . ay , my lord . they stay upon your patienc . 
 queen . come hither , my dear hamlet , sit by me . 
 ham . no , good mother . here 's metal more attract . 
 pol . [ to the king ] o , ho ! do you mark that ? 
 ham . ladi , shall i lie in your lap ? 
 [ sit down at ophelia 's feet . ] 
 oph . no , my lord . 
 ham . i mean , my head upon your lap ? 
 oph . ay , my lord . 
 ham . do you think i meant countri matter ? 
 oph . i think noth , my lord . 
 ham . that 's a fair thought to lie between maid ' leg . 
 oph . what is , my lord ? 
 ham . noth . 
 oph . you are merri , my lord . 
 ham . who , i ? 
 oph . ay , my lord . 
 ham . o god , your onli jig-mak ! what should a man do but be merri ? 
 for look you how cheer my mother look , and my father die 
 within 's two hour . 
 oph . nay 't is twice two month , my lord . 
 ham . so long ? nay then , let the devil wear black , for i 'll have a 
 suit of sabl . o heaven ! die two month ago , and not forgotten 
 yet ? then there 's hope a great man 's memori may outliv hi life 
 half a year . but , by ' r ladi , he must build church then ; or els 
 shall he suffer not think on , with the hobby-hors , whose 
 epitaph is 'for o , for o , the hobby-hors is forgot ! ' 
 
 hautboy play . the dumb show enter . 
 
 enter a king and a queen veri lovingli ; the queen embrac 
 him and he her . she kneel , and make show of protest 
 unto him . he take her up , and declin hi head upon her 
 neck . he lay him down upon a bank of flower . she , see 
 him asleep , leav him . anon come in a fellow , take off hi 
 crown , kiss it , pour poison in the sleeper 's ear , and 
 leav him . the queen return , find the king dead , and make 
 passion action . the poison with some three or four mute , 
 come in again , seem to condol with her . the dead bodi is 
 carri away . the poison wooe the queen with gift ; she 
 seem harsh and unwil awhil , but in the end accept 
 hi love . 
 exeunt . 
 
 oph . what mean thi , my lord ? 
 ham . marri , thi is mich malhecho ; it mean mischief . 
 oph . belik thi show import the argument of the play . 
 
 enter prologu . 
 
 ham . we shall know by thi fellow . the player can not keep counsel ; 
 they 'll tell all . 
 oph . will he tell us what thi show meant ? 
 ham . ay , or ani show that you 'll show him . be not you asham 'd to 
 show , he 'll not shame to tell you what it mean . 
 oph . you are naught , you are naught ! i 'll mark the play . 
 
 pro . for us , and for our tragedi , 
 here stoop to your clemenc , 
 we beg your hear patient . [ exit . ] 
 
 ham . is thi a prologu , or the posi of a ring ? 
 oph . 't is brief , my lord . 
 ham . as woman 's love . 
 
 enter [ two player as ] king and queen . 
 
 king . full thirti time hath phoebu ' cart gone round 
 neptun 's salt wash and tellu ' orb ground , 
 and thirti doze moon with borrow sheen 
 about the world have time twelv thirti been , 
 sinc love our heart , and hymen did our hand , 
 unit comutu in most sacr band . 
 queen . so mani journey may the sun and moon 
 make us again count o'er ere love be done ! 
 but woe is me ! you are so sick of late , 
 so far from cheer and from your former state . 
 that i distrust you . yet , though i distrust , 
 discomfort you , my lord , it noth must ; 
 for women 's fear and love hold quantiti , 
 in neither aught , or in extrem . 
 now what my love is , proof hath made you know ; 
 and as my love is siz 'd , my fear is so . 
 where love is great , the littlest doubt are fear ; 
 where littl fear grow great , great love grow there . 
 king . faith , i must leav thee , love , and shortli too ; 
 my oper power their function leav to do . 
 and thou shalt live in thi fair world behind , 
 honour 'd , belov 'd , and hapli one as kind 
 for husband shalt thou- 
 queen . o , confound the rest ! 
 such love must need be treason in my breast . 
 when second husband let me be accurst ! 
 none wed the second but who kill the first . 
 
 ham . [ asid ] wormwood , wormwood ! 
 
 queen . the instanc that second marriag move 
 are base respect of thrift , but none of love . 
 a second time i kill my husband dead 
 when second husband kiss me in bed . 
 king . i do believ you think what now you speak ; 
 but what we do determin oft we break . 
 purpos is but the slave to memori , 
 of violent birth , but poor valid ; 
 which now , like fruit unrip , stick on the tree , 
 but fill unshaken when they mellow be . 
 most necessari 't is that we forget 
 to pay ourselv what to ourselv is debt . 
 what to ourselv in passion we propos , 
 the passion end , doth the purpos lose . 
 the violenc of either grief or joy 
 their own enactur with themselv destroy . 
 where joy most revel , grief doth most lament ; 
 grief joy , joy griev , on slender accid . 
 thi world is not for aye , nor 't is not strang 
 that even our love should with our fortun chang ; 
 for 't is a question left us yet to prove , 
 whether love lead fortun , or els fortun love . 
 the great man down , you mark hi favourit fli , 
 the poor advanc 'd make friend of enemi ; 
 and hitherto doth love on fortun tend , 
 for who not need shall never lack a friend , 
 and who in want a hollow friend doth tri , 
 directli season him hi enemi . 
 but , orderli to end where i begun , 
 our will and fate do so contrari run 
 that our devic still are overthrown ; 
 our thought are our , their end none of our own . 
 so think thou wilt no second husband wed ; 
 but die thi thought when thi first lord is dead . 
 queen . nor earth to me give food , nor heaven light , 
 sport and repos lock from me day and night , 
 to desper turn my trust and hope , 
 an anchor 's cheer in prison be my scope , 
 each opposit that blank the face of joy 
 meet what i would have well , and it destroy , 
 both here and henc pursu me last strife , 
 if , onc a widow , ever i be wife ! 
 
 ham . if she should break it now ! 
 
 king . 't is deepli sworn . sweet , leav me here awhil . 
 my spirit grow dull , and fain i would beguil 
 the tediou day with sleep . 
 queen . sleep rock thi brain , 
 [ he ] sleep . 
 and never come mischanc between us twain ! 
 exit . 
 
 ham . madam , how like you thi play ? 
 queen . the ladi doth protest too much , methink . 
 ham . o , but she 'll keep her word . 
 king . have you heard the argument ? is there no offenc i n't ? 
 ham . no , no ! they do but jest , poison in jest ; no offenc i ' th ' 
 world . 
 king . what do you call the play ? 
 ham . 'the mousetrap . ' marri , how ? tropic . thi play is the 
 imag of a murther done in vienna . gonzago is the duke 's name ; 
 hi wife , baptista . you shall see anon . 't is a knavish piec of 
 work ; but what o ' that ? your majesti , and we that have free 
 soul , it touch us not . let the gall 'd jade winch ; our wither 
 are unwrung . 
 
 enter lucianu . 
 
 thi is one lucianu , nephew to the king . 
 oph . you are as good as a choru , my lord . 
 ham . i could interpret between you and your love , if i could see 
 the puppet dalli . 
 oph . you are keen , my lord , you are keen . 
 ham . it would cost you a groan to take off my edg . 
 oph . still better , and wors . 
 ham . so you must take your husbands.- begin , murther . pox , leav 
 thi damnabl face , and begin ! come , the croak raven doth 
 bellow for reveng . 
 
 luc . thought black , hand apt , drug fit , and time agre ; 
 confeder season , els no creatur see ; 
 thou mixtur rank , of midnight weed collect , 
 with hecat 's ban thrice blast , thrice infect , 
 thi natur magic and dire properti 
 on wholesom life usurp immedi . 
 pour the poison in hi ear . 
 
 ham . he poison him i ' th ' garden for 's estat . hi name 's gonzago . 
 the stori is extant , and written in veri choic italian . you 
 shall see anon how the murther get the love of gonzago 's wife . 
 oph . the king rise . 
 ham . what , fright with fals fire ? 
 queen . how fare my lord ? 
 pol . give o'er the play . 
 king . give me some light ! away ! 
 all . light , light , light ! 
 exeunt all but hamlet and horatio . 
 ham . whi , let the strucken deer go weep , 
 the hart ungal play ; 
 for some must watch , while some must sleep : 
 thu run the world away . 
 would not thi , sir , and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my 
 fortun turn turk with me-with two provinci rose on my raz 'd 
 shoe , get me a fellowship in a cri of player , sir ? 
 hor . half a share . 
 ham . a whole one i ! 
 for thou dost know , o damon dear , 
 thi realm dismantl wa 
 of jove himself ; and now reign here 
 a veri , very- pajock . 
 hor . you might have rhym 'd . 
 ham . o good horatio , i 'll take the ghost 's word for a thousand 
 pound ! didst perceiv ? 
 hor . veri well , my lord . 
 ham . upon the talk of the poison ? 
 hor . i did veri well note him . 
 ham . aha ! come , some music ! come , the record ! 
 for if the king like not the comedi , 
 whi then , belik he like it not , perdi . 
 come , some music ! 
 
 enter rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 
 guil . good my lord , vouchsaf me a word with you . 
 ham . sir , a whole histori . 
 guil . the king , sir- 
 ham . ay , sir , what of him ? 
 guil . is in hi retir , marvel distemp 'd . 
 ham . with drink , sir ? 
 guil . no , my lord ; rather with choler . 
 ham . your wisdom should show itself more richer to signifi thi to 
 the doctor ; for me to put him to hi purgat would perhap 
 plung him into far more choler . 
 guil . good my lord , put your discours into some frame , and start 
 not so wildli from my affair . 
 ham . i am tame , sir ; pronounc . 
 guil . the queen , your mother , in most great afflict of spirit 
 hath sent me to you . 
 ham . you are welcom . 
 guil . nay , good my lord , thi courtesi is not of the right breed . 
 if it shall pleas you to make me a wholesom answer , i will do 
 your mother 's command ; if not , your pardon and my return 
 shall be the end of my busi . 
 ham . sir , i can not . 
 guil . what , my lord ? 
 ham . make you a wholesom answer ; my wit 's disea 'd . but , sir , such 
 answer is i can make , you shall command ; or rather , as you say , 
 my mother . therefor no more , but to the matter ! my mother , you 
 say- 
 ro . then thu she say : your behaviour hath struck her into 
 amaz and admir . 
 ham . o wonder son , that can so stonish a mother ! but is there no 
 sequel at the heel of thi mother 's admir ? impart . 
 ro . she desir to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed . 
 ham . we shall obey , were she ten time our mother . have you ani 
 further trade with us ? 
 ro . my lord , you onc did love me . 
 ham . and do still , by these picker and stealer ! 
 ro . good my lord , what is your caus of distemp ? you do sure 
 bar the door upon your own liberti , if you deni your grief to 
 your friend . 
 ham . sir , i lack advanc . 
 ro . how can that be , when you have the voic of the king himself 
 for your success in denmark ? 
 ham . ay , sir , but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is someth 
 musti . 
 
 enter the player with record . 
 
 o , the record ! let me see one . to withdraw with you- whi do 
 you go about to recov the wind of me , as if you would drive me 
 into a toil ? 
 guil . o my lord , if my duti be too bold , my love is too unmannerli . 
 ham . i do not well understand that . will you play upon thi pipe ? 
 guil . my lord , i can not . 
 ham . i pray you . 
 guil . believ me , i can not . 
 ham . i do beseech you . 
 guil . i know , no touch of it , my lord . 
 ham . it is as easi as lie . govern these ventag with your 
 finger and thumb , give it breath with your mouth , and it will 
 discours most eloqu music . look you , these are the stop . 
 guil . but these can not i command to ani utt'ranc of harmoni . i 
 have not the skill . 
 ham . whi , look you now , how unworthi a thing you make of me ! you 
 would play upon me ; you would seem to know my stop ; you would 
 pluck out the heart of my mysteri ; you would sound me from my 
 lowest note to the top of my compass ; and there is much music , 
 excel voic , in thi littl organ , yet can not you make it 
 speak . 'sblood , do you think i am easier to be play 'd on than a 
 pipe ? call me what instrument you will , though you can fret me , 
 you can not play upon me . 
 
 enter poloniu . 
 
 god bless you , sir ! 
 pol . my lord , the queen would speak with you , and present . 
 ham . do you see yonder cloud that 's almost in shape of a camel ? 
 pol . by th ' mass , and 't is like a camel inde . 
 ham . methink it is like a weasel . 
 pol . it is back 'd like a weasel . 
 ham . or like a whale . 
 pol . veri like a whale . 
 ham . then will i come to my mother by-and-by.- they fool me to the 
 top of my bent.- i will come by-and-bi . 
 pol . i will say so . exit . 
 ham . 'by-and-bi ' is easili said.- leav me , friend . 
 [ exeunt all but hamlet . ] 
 't is now the veri witch time of night , 
 when churchyard yawn , and hell itself breath out 
 contagion to thi world . now could i drink hot blood 
 and do such bitter busi as the day 
 would quak to look on . soft ! now to my mother ! 
 o heart , lose not thi natur ; let not ever 
 the soul of nero enter thi firm bosom . 
 let me be cruel , not unnatur ; 
 i will speak dagger to her , but use none . 
 my tongu and soul in thi be hypocrites- 
 how in my word somev she be shent , 
 to give them seal never , my soul , consent ! exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a room in the castl . 
 
 enter king , rosencrantz , and guildenstern . 
 
 king . i like him not , nor stand it safe with us 
 to let hi mad rang . therefor prepar you ; 
 i your commiss will forthwith dispatch , 
 and he to england shall along with you . 
 the term of our estat may not endur 
 hazard so near us as doth hourli grow 
 out of hi lunaci . 
 guil . we will ourselv provid . 
 most holi and religi fear it is 
 to keep those mani mani bodi safe 
 that live and feed upon your majesti . 
 ro . the singl and peculiar life is bound 
 with all the strength and armour of the mind 
 to keep itself from noyanc ; but much more 
 that spirit upon whose weal depend and rest 
 the live of mani . the cess of majesti 
 die not alon , but like a gulf doth draw 
 what 's near it with it . it is a massi wheel , 
 fix 'd on the summit of the highest mount , 
 to whose huge spoke ten thousand lesser thing 
 are morti 'd and adjoin 'd ; which when it fall , 
 each small annex , petti consequ , 
 attend the boist'rou ruin . never alon 
 did the king sigh , but with a gener groan . 
 king . arm you , i pray you , to th ' , speedi voyag ; 
 for we will fetter put upon thi fear , 
 which now goe too free-foot . 
 both . we will hast us . 
 exeunt gentlemen . 
 
 enter poloniu . 
 
 pol . my lord , he 's go to hi mother 's closet . 
 behind the arra i 'll convey myself 
 to hear the process . i 'll warrant she 'll tax him home ; 
 and , as you said , and wise wa it said , 
 't is meet that some more audienc than a mother , 
 sinc natur make them partial , should o'erhear 
 the speech , of vantag . fare you well , my lieg . 
 i 'll call upon you ere you go to bed 
 and tell you what i know . 
 king . thank , dear my lord . 
 exit [ poloniu ] . 
 o , my offenc is rank , it smell to heaven ; 
 it hath the primal eldest curs upo n't , 
 a brother 's murther ! pray can i not , 
 though inclin be as sharp as will . 
 my stronger guilt defeat my strong intent , 
 and , like a man to doubl busi bound , 
 i stand in paus where i shall first begin , 
 and both neglect . what if thi curs hand 
 were thicker than itself with brother 's blood , 
 is there not rain enough in the sweet heaven 
 to wash it white as snow ? whereto serv merci 
 but to confront the visag of offenc ? 
 and what 's in prayer but thi twofold forc , 
 to be forestal ere we come to fall , 
 or pardon 'd be down ? then i 'll look up ; 
 my fault is past . but , o , what form of prayer 
 can serv my turn ? 'forgiv me my foul murther ' ? 
 that can not be ; sinc i am still possess 'd 
 of those effect for which i did the murther- 
 my crown , mine own ambit , and my queen . 
 may one be pardon 'd and retain th ' offenc ? 
 in the corrupt current of thi world 
 offenc 's gild hand may shove by justic , 
 and oft 't is seen the wick prize itself 
 buy out the law ; but 't is not so abov . 
 there is no shuffl ; there the action lie 
 in hi true natur , and we ourselv compel 'd , 
 even to the teeth and forehead of our fault , 
 to give in evid . what then ? what rest ? 
 tri what repent can . what can it not ? 
 yet what can it when one can not repent ? 
 o wretch state ! o bosom black as death ! 
 o lime soul , that , struggl to be free , 
 art more engag 'd ! help , angel ! make assay . 
 bow , stubborn knee ; and heart with string of steel , 
 be soft as sinew of the new-born babe ! 
 all may be well . he kneel . 
 
 enter hamlet . 
 
 ham . now might i do it pat , now he is pray ; 
 and now i 'll do't . and so he goe to heaven , 
 and so am i reveng 'd . that would be scann 'd . 
 a villain kill my father ; and for that , 
 i , hi sole son , do thi same villain send 
 to heaven . 
 whi , thi is hire and salari , not reveng ! 
 he took my father grossli , full of bread , 
 with all hi crime broad blown , as flush as may ; 
 and how hi audit stand , who know save heaven ? 
 but in our circumst and cours of thought , 
 't is heavi with him ; and am i then reveng 'd , 
 to take him in the purg of hi soul , 
 when he is fit and season for hi passag ? 
 no . 
 up , sword , and know thou a more horrid hent . 
 when he is drunk asleep ; or in hi rage ; 
 or in th ' incestu pleasur of hi bed ; 
 at game , swear , or about some act 
 that ha no relish of salvat in't- 
 then trip him , that hi heel may kick at heaven , 
 and that hi soul may be as damn 'd and black 
 as hell , whereto it goe . my mother stay . 
 thi physic but prolong thi sickli day . exit . 
 king . [ rise ] my word fli up , my thought remain below . 
 word without thought never to heaven go . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the queen 's closet . 
 
 enter queen and poloniu . 
 
 pol . he will come straight . look you lay home to him . 
 tell him hi prank have been too broad to bear with , 
 and that your grace hath screen 'd and stood between 
 much heat and him . i 'll silenc me even here . 
 pray you be round with him . 
 ham . ( within ) mother , mother , mother ! 
 queen . i 'll warrant you ; fear me not . withdraw ; i hear him come . 
 [ poloniu hide behind the arra . ] 
 
 enter hamlet . 
 
 ham . now , mother , what 's the matter ? 
 queen . hamlet , thou hast thi father much offend . 
 ham . mother , you have my father much offend . 
 queen . come , come , you answer with an idl tongu . 
 ham . go , go , you question with a wick tongu . 
 queen . whi , how now , hamlet ? 
 ham . what 's the matter now ? 
 queen . have you forgot me ? 
 ham . no , by the rood , not so ! 
 you are the queen , your husband 's brother 's wife , 
 and ( would it were not so ! ) you are my mother . 
 queen . nay , then i 'll set those to you that can speak . 
 ham . come , come , and sit you down . you shall not budg i 
 you go not till i set you up a glass 
 where you may see the inmost part of you . 
 queen . what wilt thou do ? thou wilt not murther me ? 
 help , help , ho ! 
 pol . [ behind ] what , ho ! help , help , help ! 
 ham . [ draw ] how now ? a rat ? dead for a ducat , dead ! 
 [ make a pass through the arra and ] kill poloniu . 
 pol . [ behind ] o , i am slain ! 
 queen . o me , what hast thou done ? 
 ham . nay , i know not . is it the king ? 
 queen . o , what a rash and bloodi deed is thi ! 
 ham . a bloodi deed- almost as bad , good mother , 
 as kill a king , and marri with hi brother . 
 queen . as kill a king ? 
 ham . ay , ladi , it wa my word . 
 [ lift up the arra and see poloniu . ] 
 thou wretch , rash , intrud fool , farewel ! 
 i took thee for thi better . take thi fortun . 
 thou find'st to be too busi is some danger . 
 leav wring of your hind . peac ! sit you down 
 and let me wring your heart ; for so i shall 
 if it be made of penetr stuff ; 
 if damn custom have not braz 'd it so 
 that it is proof and bulwark against sens . 
 queen . what have i done that thou dar'st wag thi tongu 
 in nois so rude against me ? 
 ham . such an act 
 that blur the grace and blush of modesti ; 
 call virtu hypocrit ; take off the rose 
 from the fair forehead of an innoc love , 
 and set a blister there ; make marriag vow 
 as fals as dicer ' oath . o , such a deed 
 as from the bodi of contract pluck 
 the veri soul , and sweet religion make 
 a rhapsodi of word ! heaven 's face doth glow ; 
 yea , thi solid and compound mass , 
 with trist visag , as against the doom , 
 is thought-sick at the act . 
 queen . ay me , what act , 
 that roar so loud and thunder in the index ? 
 ham . look here upon th 's pictur , and on thi , 
 the counterfeit present of two brother . 
 see what a grace wa seat on thi brow ; 
 hyperion 's curl ; the front of jove himself ; 
 an eye like mar , to threaten and command ; 
 a station like the herald mercuri 
 new light on a heaven-kiss hill : 
 a combin and a form inde 
 where everi god did seem to set hi seal 
 to give the world assur of a man . 
 thi wa your husband . look you now what follow . 
 here is your husband , like a mildew 'd ear 
 blast hi wholesom brother . have you eye ? 
 could you on thi fair mountain leav to feed , 
 and batten on thi moor ? ha ! have you eye 
 you can not call it love ; for at your age 
 the heyday in the blood is tame , it 's humbl , 
 and wait upon the judgment ; and what judgment 
 would step from thi to thi ? sens sure you have , 
 els could you not have motion ; but sure that sens 
 is apoplex 'd ; for mad would not err , 
 nor sens to ecstaci wa ne'er so thrall 'd 
 but it reserv 'd some quantiti of choic 
 to serv in such a differ . what devil was't 
 that thu hath cozen 'd you at hoodman-blind ? 
 eye without feel , feel without sight , 
 ear without hand or eye , smell san all , 
 or but a sickli part of one true sens 
 could not so mope . 
 o shame ! where is thi blush ? rebelli hell , 
 if thou canst mutin in a matron 's bone , 
 to flame youth let virtu be as wax 
 and melt in her own fire . proclaim no shame 
 when the compuls ardour give the charg , 
 sinc frost itself as activ doth burn , 
 and reason pander will . 
 queen . o hamlet , speak no more ! 
 thou turn'st mine eye into my veri soul , 
 and there i see such black and grain spot 
 as will not leav their tinct . 
 ham . nay , but to live 
 in the rank sweat of an enseam bed , 
 stew 'd in corrupt , honey and make love 
 over the nasti sti ! 
 queen . o , speak to me no more ! 
 these word like dagger enter in mine ear . 
 no more , sweet hamlet ! 
 ham . a murther and a villain ! 
 a slave that is not twentieth part the tith 
 of your preced lord ; a vice of king ; 
 a cutpurs of the empir and the rule , 
 that from a shelf the preciou diadem stole 
 and put it in hi pocket ! 
 queen . no more ! 
 
 enter the ghost in hi nightgown . 
 
 ham . a king of shred and patch ! - 
 save me and hover o'er me with your wing , 
 you heavenli guard ! what would your graciou figur ? 
 queen . ala , he 's mad ! 
 ham . do you not come your tardi son to chide , 
 that , lap 'd in time and passion , let go by 
 th ' import act of your dread command ? 
 o , say ! 
 ghost . do not forget . thi visit 
 is but to whet thi almost blunt purpos . 
 but look , amaz on thi mother sit . 
 o , step between her and her fight soul 
 conceit in weakest bodi strongest work . 
 speak to her , hamlet . 
 ham . how is it with you , ladi ? 
 queen . ala , how is't with you , 
 that you do bend your eye on vacanc , 
 and with th ' encorpor air do hold discours ? 
 forth at your eye your spirit wildli peep ; 
 and , as the sleep soldier in th ' alarm , 
 your bed hair , like life in excrement , 
 start up and stand an end . o gentl son , 
 upon the beat and flame of thi distemp 
 sprinkl cool patienc ! whereon do you look ? 
 ham . on him , on him ! look you how pale he glare ! 
 hi form and caus conjoin 'd , preach to stone , 
 would make them capable.- do not look upon me , 
 lest with thi piteou action you convert 
 my stern effect . then what i have to do 
 will want true colour- tear perchanc for blood . 
 queen . to whom do you speak thi ? 
 ham . do you see noth there ? 
 queen . noth at all ; yet all that is i see . 
 ham . nor did you noth hear ? 
 queen . no , noth but ourselv . 
 ham . whi , look you there ! look how it steal away ! 
 my father , in hi habit as he liv 'd ! 
 look where he goe even now out at the portal ! 
 exit ghost . 
 queen . thi is the veri coinag of your brain . 
 thi bodiless creation ecstasi 
 is veri cun in . 
 ham . ecstasi ? 
 my puls as your doth temper keep time 
 and make as health music . it is not mad 
 that i have utt'r . bring me to the test , 
 and i the matter will reword ; which mad 
 would gambol from . mother , for love of grace , 
 lay not that flatter unction to your soul 
 that not your trespass but my mad speak . 
 it will but skin and film the ulcer place , 
 while rank corrupt , mine all within , 
 infect unseen . confess yourself to heaven ; 
 repent what 's past ; avoid what is to come ; 
 and do not spread the compost on the weed 
 to make them ranker . forgiv me thi my virtu ; 
 for in the fat of these pursi time 
 virtu itself of vice must pardon beg- 
 yea , curb and woo for leav to do him good . 
 queen . o hamlet , thou hast cleft my heart in twain . 
 ham . o , throw away the worser part of it , 
 and live the purer with the other half , 
 good night- but go not to my uncl 's bed . 
 assum a virtu , if you have it not . 
 that monster , custom , who all sens doth eat 
 of habit evil , is angel yet in thi , 
 that to the use of action fair and good 
 he likewis give a frock or liveri , 
 that aptli is put on . refrain to-night , 
 and that shall lend a kind of easi 
 to the next abstin ; the next more easi ; 
 for use almost can chang the stamp of natur , 
 and either [ master ] the devil , or throw him out 
 with wondrou potenc . onc more , good night ; 
 and when you are desir to be blest , 
 i 'll bless beg of you.- for thi same lord , 
 i do repent ; but heaven hath plea 'd it so , 
 to punish me with thi , and thi with me , 
 that i must be their scourg and minist . 
 i will bestow him , and will answer well 
 the death i gave him . so again , good night . 
 i must be cruel , onli to be kind ; 
 thu bad begin , and wors remain behind . 
 one word more , good ladi . 
 queen . what shall i do ? 
 ham . not thi , by no mean , that i bid you do : 
 let the bloat king tempt you again to bed ; 
 pinch wanton on your cheek ; call you hi mous ; 
 and let him , for a pair of reechi kiss , 
 or paddl in your neck with hi damn 'd finger , 
 make you to ravel all thi matter out , 
 that i essenti am not in mad , 
 but mad in craft . 'twere good you let him know ; 
 for who that 's but a queen , fair , sober , wise , 
 would from a paddock , from a bat , a gib 
 such dear concern hide ? who would do so ? 
 no , in despit of sens and secreci , 
 unpeg the basket on the hous 's top , 
 let the bird fli , and like the famou ape , 
 to tri conclus , in the basket creep 
 and break your own neck down . 
 queen . be thou assur 'd , if word be made of breath , 
 and breath of life , i have no life to breath 
 what thou hast said to me . 
 ham . i must to england ; you know that ? 
 queen . alack , 
 i had forgot ! 't is so conclud on . 
 ham . there 's letter seal 'd ; and my two schoolfellow , 
 whom i will trust as i will adder fang 'd , 
 they bear the mandat ; they must sweep my way 
 and marshal me to knaveri . let it work ; 
 for 't is the sport to have the engin 
 hoist with hi own petar ; and 't shall go hard 
 but i will delv one yard below their mine 
 and blow them at the moon . o , 't is most sweet 
 when in one line two craft directli meet . 
 thi man shall set me pack . 
 i 'll lug the gut into the neighbour room.- 
 mother , good night.- inde , thi counsellor 
 is now most still , most secret , and most grave , 
 who wa in life a foolish peat knave . 
 come , sir , to draw toward an end with you . 
 good night , mother . 
 [ exit the queen . then ] exit hamlet , tug in 
 poloniu . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 elsinor . a room in the castl . 
 
 enter king and queen , with rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 
 king . there 's matter in these sigh . these profound heav 
 you must translat ; 't is fit we understand them . 
 where is your son ? 
 queen . bestow thi place on us a littl while . 
 [ exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern . ] 
 ah , mine own lord , what have i seen to-night ! 
 king . what , gertrud ? how doe hamlet ? 
 queen . mad as the sea and wind when both contend 
 which is the mightier . in hi lawless fit 
 behind the arra hear someth stir , 
 whip out hi rapier , cri ' a rat , a rat ! ' 
 and in thi brainish apprehens kill 
 the unseen good old man . 
 king . o heavi deed ! 
 it had been so with us , had we been there . 
 hi liberti is full of threat to all- 
 to you yourself , to us , to everi one . 
 ala , how shall thi bloodi deed be answer 'd ? 
 it will be laid to us , whose provid 
 should have kept short , restrain 'd , and out of haunt 
 thi mad young man . but so much wa our love 
 we would not understand what wa most fit , 
 but , like the owner of a foul diseas , 
 to keep it from divulg , let it feed 
 even on the pith of life . where is he gone ? 
 queen . to draw apart the bodi he hath kill 'd ; 
 o'er whom hi veri mad , like some ore 
 among a miner of metal base , 
 show itself pure . he weep for what is done . 
 king . o gertrud , come away ! 
 the sun no sooner shall the mountain touch 
 but we will ship him henc ; and thi vile deed 
 we must with all our majesti and skill 
 both counten and excus . ho , guildenstern ! 
 
 enter rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 
 friend both , go join you with some further aid . 
 hamlet in mad hath poloniu slain , 
 and from hi mother 's closet hath he dragg 'd him . 
 go seek him out ; speak fair , and bring the bodi 
 into the chapel . i pray you hast in thi . 
 exeunt [ rosencrantz and guildenstern ] . 
 come , gertrud , we 'll call up our wisest friend 
 and let them know both what we mean to do 
 and what 's untim done . [ so hapli slander- ] 
 whose whisper o'er the world 's diamet , 
 as level as the cannon to hi blank , 
 transport hi poison shot- may miss our name 
 and hit the woundless air.- o , come away ! 
 my soul is full of discord and dismay . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 elsinor . a passag in the castl . 
 
 enter hamlet . 
 
 ham . safe stow 'd . 
 gentlemen . ( within ) hamlet ! lord hamlet ! 
 ham . but soft ! what nois ? who call on hamlet ? o , here they come . 
 
 enter rosencrantz and guildenstern . 
 
 ro . what have you done , my lord , with the dead bodi ? 
 ham . compound it with dust , whereto 't is kin . 
 ro . tell us where 't is , that we may take it thenc 
 and bear it to the chapel . 
 ham . do not believ it . 
 ro . believ what ? 
 ham . that i can keep your counsel , and not mine own . besid , to be 
 demand of a spong , what replic should be made by the son 
 of a king ? 
 ro . take you me for a spong , my lord ? 
 ham . ay , sir ; that soak up the king 's counten , hi reward , 
 hi author . but such offic do the king best servic in 
 the end . he keep them , like an ape , in the corner of hi jaw ; 
 first mouth 'd , to be last swallow . when he need what you have 
 glean 'd , it is but squeez you and , spong , you shall be dri 
 again . 
 ro . i understand you not , my lord . 
 ham . i am glad of it . a knavish speech sleep in a foolish ear . 
 ro . my lord , you must tell us where the bodi is and go with us to 
 the king . 
 ham . the bodi is with the king , but the king is not with the bodi . 
 the king is a thing- 
 guil . a thing , my lord ? 
 ham . of noth . bring me to him . hide fox , and all after . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 elsinor . a room in the castl . 
 
 enter king . 
 
 king . i have sent to seek him and to find the bodi . 
 how danger is it that thi man goe loos ! 
 yet must not we put the strong law on him . 
 he 's lov 'd of the distract multitud , 
 who like not in their judgment , but their eye ; 
 and where 't is so , th ' offend 's scourg is weigh 'd , 
 but never the offenc . to bear all smooth and even , 
 thi sudden send him away must seem 
 deliber paus . diseas desper grown 
 by desper applianc are reliev 'd , 
 or not at all . 
 
 enter rosencrantz . 
 
 how now o what hath befall'n ? 
 ro . where the dead bodi is bestow 'd , my lord , 
 we can not get from him . 
 king . but where is he ? 
 ro . without , my lord ; guard , to know your pleasur . 
 king . bring him befor us . 
 ro . ho , guildenstern ! bring in my lord . 
 
 enter hamlet and guildenstern [ with attend ] . 
 
 king . now , hamlet , where 's poloniu ? 
 ham . at supper . 
 king . at supper ? where ? 
 ham . not where he eat , but where he is eaten . a certain 
 convoc of polit worm are e'en at him . your worm is your 
 onli emperor for diet . we fat all creatur els to fat us , and 
 we fat ourselv for maggot . your fat king and your lean beggar 
 is but variabl service- two dish , but to one tabl . that 's the 
 end . 
 king . ala , ala ! 
 ham . a man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king , and eat 
 of the fish that hath fed of that worm . 
 king . what dost thou mean by thi ? 
 ham . noth but to show you how a king may go a progress through 
 the gut of a beggar . 
 king . where is poloniu ? 
 ham . in heaven . send thither to see . if your messeng find him not 
 there , seek him i ' th ' other place yourself . but inde , if you 
 find him not within thi month , you shall nose him as you go up 
 the stair , into the lobbi . 
 king . go seek him there . [ to attend . ] 
 ham . he will stay till you come . 
 [ exeunt attend . ] 
 king . hamlet , thi deed , for thine especi safeti , - 
 which we do tender as we dearli griev 
 for that which thou hast done , - must send thee henc 
 with fieri quick . therefor prepar thyself . 
 the bark is readi and the wind at help , 
 th ' associ tend , and everyth is bent 
 for england . 
 ham . for england ? 
 king . ay , hamlet . 
 ham . good . 
 king . so is it , if thou knew'st our purpos . 
 ham . i see a cherub that see them . but come , for england ! 
 farewel , dear mother . 
 king . thi love father , hamlet . 
 ham . my mother ! father and mother is man and wife ; man and wife is 
 one flesh ; and so , my mother . come , for england ! 
 exit . 
 king . follow him at foot ; tempt him with speed aboard . 
 delay it not ; i 'll have him henc to-night . 
 away ! for everyth is seal 'd and done 
 that els lean on th ' affair . pray you make hast . 
 exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern ] 
 and , england , if my love thou hold'st at aught , - 
 as my great power thereof may give thee sens , 
 sinc yet thi cicatric look raw and red 
 after the danish sword , and thi free awe 
 pay homag to us , - thou mayst not coldli set 
 our sovereign process , which import at full , 
 by letter congru to that effect , 
 the present death of hamlet . do it , england ; 
 for like the hectic in my blood he rage , 
 and thou must cure me . till i know 't is done , 
 howe' my hap , my joy were ne'er begun . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 near elsinor . 
 
 enter fortinbra with hi armi over the stage . 
 
 for . go , captain , from me greet the danish king . 
 tell him that by hi licens fortinbra 
 crave the convey of a promi 'd march 
 over hi kingdom . you know the rendezv . 
 if that hi majesti would aught with us , 
 we shall express our duti in hi eye ; 
 and let him know so . 
 capt . i will do't , my lord . 
 for . go softli on . 
 exeunt [ all but the captain ] . 
 
 enter hamlet , rosencrantz , [ guildenstern , ] and other . 
 
 ham . good sir , whose power are these ? 
 capt . they are of norway , sir . 
 ham . how purpo 'd , sir , i pray you ? 
 capt . against some part of poland . 
 ham . who command them , sir ? 
 capt . the nephew to old norway , fortinbra . 
 ham . goe it against the main of poland , sir , 
 or for some frontier ? 
 capt . truli to speak , and with no addit , 
 we go to gain a littl patch of ground 
 that hath in it no profit but the name . 
 to pay five ducat , five , i would not farm it ; 
 nor will it yield to norway or the pole 
 a ranker rate , should it be sold in fee . 
 ham . whi , then the polack never will defend it . 
 capt . ye , it is alreadi garrison 'd . 
 ham . two thousand soul and twenti thousand ducat 
 will not debat the question of thi straw . 
 thi is th ' imposthum of much wealth and peac , 
 that inward break , and show no caus without 
 whi the man dies.- i humbl thank you , sir . 
 capt . god b ' wi ' you , sir . [ exit . ] 
 ro . will't pleas you go , my lord ? 
 ham . i 'll be with you straight . go a littl befor . 
 [ exeunt all but hamlet . ] 
 how all occas do inform against me 
 and spur my dull reveng ! what is a man , 
 if hi chief good and market of hi time 
 be but to sleep and feed ? a beast , no more . 
 sure he that made us with such larg discours , 
 look befor and after , gave us not 
 that capabl and godlik reason 
 to fust in us unu 'd . now , whether it be 
 bestial oblivion , or some craven scrupl 
 of think too precis on th ' event , - 
 a thought which , quarter 'd , hath but one part wisdom 
 and ever three part coward , - i do not know 
 whi yet i live to say 'thi thing 's to do , ' 
 sith i have caus , and will , and strength , and mean 
 to do't . exampl gross as earth exhort me . 
 wit thi armi of such mass and charg , 
 led by a delic and tender princ , 
 whose spirit , with divin ambit puff 'd , 
 make mouth at the invis event , 
 expos what is mortal and unsur 
 to all that fortun , death , and danger dare , 
 even for an eggshel . rightli to be great 
 is not to stir without great argument , 
 but greatli to find quarrel in a straw 
 when honour 's at the stake . how stand i then , 
 that have a father klll 'd , a mother stain 'd , 
 excit of my reason and my blood , 
 and let all sleep , while to my shame i see 
 the immin death of twenti thousand men 
 that for a fantasi and trick of fame 
 go to their grave like bed , fight for a plot 
 whereon the number can not tri the caus , 
 which is not tomb enough and contin 
 to hide the slain ? o , from thi time forth , 
 my thought be bloodi , or be noth worth ! exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 elsinor . a room in the castl . 
 
 enter horatio , queen , and a gentleman . 
 
 queen . i will not speak with her . 
 gent . she is importun , inde distract . 
 her mood will need be piti . 
 queen . what would she have ? 
 gent . she speak much of her father ; say she hear 
 there 's trick i ' th ' world , and hem , and beat her heart ; 
 spurn envious at straw ; speak thing in doubt , 
 that carri but half sens . her speech is noth , 
 yet the unshap use of it doth move 
 the hearer to collect ; they aim at it , 
 and botch the word up fit to their own thought ; 
 which , as her wink and nod and gestur yield them , 
 inde would make one think there might be thought , 
 though noth sure , yet much unhappili . 
 hor . 'twere good she were spoken with ; for she may strew 
 danger conjectur in ill-breed mind . 
 queen . let her come in . 
 [ exit gentleman . ] 
 [ asid ] to my sick soul ( as sin 's true natur is ) 
 each toy seem prologu to some great amiss . 
 so full of artless jealousi is guilt 
 it spill itself in fear to be spilt . 
 
 enter ophelia distract . 
 
 oph . where is the beauteou majesti of denmark ? 
 queen . how now , ophelia ? 
 oph . ( sing ) 
 how should i your true-lov know 
 from anoth one ? 
 by hi cockl bat and ' staff 
 and hi sandal shoon . 
 
 queen . ala , sweet ladi , what import thi song ? 
 oph . say you ? nay , pray you mark . 
 
 ( sing ) he is dead and gone , ladi , 
 he is dead and gone ; 
 at hi head a grass-green turf , 
 at hi heel a stone . 
 
 o , ho ! 
 queen . nay , but ophelia- 
 oph . pray you mark . 
 
 ( sing ) white hi shroud as the mountain snow- 
 
 enter king . 
 
 queen . ala , look here , my lord ! 
 oph . ( sing ) 
 lard all with sweet flower ; 
 which bewept to the grave did not go 
 with true-lov shower . 
 
 king . how do you , pretti ladi ? 
 oph . well , god dild you ! they say the owl wa a baker 's daughter . 
 lord , we know what we are , but know not what we may be . god be at 
 your tabl ! 
 king . conceit upon her father . 
 oph . pray let 's have no word of thi ; but when they ask , you what 
 it mean , say you thi : 
 
 ( sing ) to-morrow is saint valentin 's day , 
 all in the morn bedtim , 
 and i a maid at your window , 
 to be your valentin . 
 
 then up he rose and donn 'd hi clo'e 
 and dupp 'd the chamber door , 
 let in the maid , that out a maid 
 never depart more . 
 
 king . pretti ophelia ! 
 oph . inde , la , without an oath , i 'll make an end o n't ! 
 
 [ sing ] by gi and by saint chariti , 
 alack , and fie for shame ! 
 young men will do't if they come to't 
 by cock , they are to blame . 
 
 quoth she , 'befor you tumbl me , 
 you promi 'd me to wed. ' 
 
 he answer : 
 
 'so would i ' a ' done , by yonder sun , 
 an thou hadst not come to my bed . ' 
 
 king . how long hath she been thu ? 
 oph . i hope all will be well . we must be patient ; but i can not 
 choos but weep to think they would lay him i ' th ' cold ground . 
 my brother shall know of it ; and so i thank you for your good 
 counsel . come , my coach ! good night , ladi . good night , sweet 
 ladi . good night , good night . exit 
 king . follow her close ; give her good watch , i pray you . 
 [ exit horatio . ] 
 o , thi is the poison of deep grief ; it spring 
 all from her father 's death . o gertrud , gertrud , 
 when sorrow come , they come not singl spi . 
 but in battalion ! first , her father slain ; 
 next , your son gone , and he most violent author 
 of hi own just remov ; the peopl muddi , 
 thick and and unwholesom in their thought and whisper 
 for good poloniu ' death , and we have done but greenli 
 in hugger-mugg to inter him ; poor ophelia 
 divid from herself and her fair-judg , 
 without the which we are pictur or mere beast ; 
 last , and as such contain as all these , 
 her brother is in secret come from franc ; 
 and want not buzzer to infect hi ear 
 feed on hi wonder , keep , himself in cloud , 
 with pestil speech of hi father 's death , 
 wherein necess , of matter beggar 'd , 
 will noth stick our person to arraign 
 in ear and ear . o my dear gertrud , thi , 
 like to a murd'r piec , in mani place 
 give , me superflu death . a nois within . 
 queen . alack , what nois is thi ? 
 king . where are my switzer ? let them guard the door . 
 
 enter a messeng . 
 
 what is the matter ? 
 mess . save yourself , my lord : 
 the ocean , overp of hi list , 
 eat not the flat with more impetu hast 
 than young laert , in a riotou head , 
 o'erbear your offic . the rabbl call him lord ; 
 and , as the world were now but to begin , 
 antiqu forgot , custom not known , 
 the ratifi and prop of everi word , 
 they cri 'choos we ! laert shall be king ! ' 
 cap , hand , and tongu applaud it to the cloud , 
 'laert shall be king ! laert king ! ' 
 a nois within . 
 queen . how cheer on the fals trail they cri ! 
 o , thi is counter , you fals danish dog ! 
 king . the door are broke . 
 
 enter laert with other . 
 
 laer . where is thi king ? - sir , staid you all without . 
 all . no , let 's come in ! 
 laer . i pray you give me leav . 
 all . we will , we will ! 
 laer . i thank you . keep the door . [ exeunt hi follow . ] 
 o thou vile king , 
 give me my father ! 
 queen . calmli , good laert . 
 laer . that drop of blood that 's calm proclaim me bastard ; 
 cri cuckold to my father ; brand the harlot 
 even here between the chast unsmirch brow 
 of my true mother . 
 king . what is the caus , laert , 
 that thi rebellion look so giantlik ? 
 let him go , gertrud . do not fear our person . 
 there 's such divin doth hedg a king 
 that treason can but peep to what it would , 
 act littl of hi will . tell me , laert , 
 whi thou art thu incen 'd . let him go , gertrud . 
 speak , man . 
 laer . where is my father ? 
 king . dead . 
 queen . but not by him ! 
 king . let him demand hi fill . 
 laer . how came he dead ? i 'll not be juggl with : 
 to hell , allegi ! vow , to the blackest devil 
 conscienc and grace , to the profoundest pit ! 
 i dare damnat . to thi point i stand , 
 that both the world , i give to neglig , 
 let come what come ; onli i 'll be reveng 'd 
 most throughli for my father . 
 king . who shall stay you ? 
 laer . my will , not all the world ! 
 and for my mean , i 'll husband them so well 
 they shall go far with littl . 
 king . good laert , 
 if you desir to know the certainti 
 of your dear father 's death , is't writ in your reveng 
 that swoopstak you will draw both friend and foe , 
 winner and loser ? 
 laer . none but hi enemi . 
 king . will you know them then ? 
 laer . to hi good friend thu wide i 'll ope my arm 
 and , like the kind life-rend'r pelican , 
 repast them with my blood . 
 king . whi , now you speak 
 like a good child and a true gentleman . 
 that i am guiltless of your father 's death , 
 and am most sensibl in grief for it , 
 it shall as level to your judgment pierc 
 as day doe to your eye . 
 a nois within : 'let her come in . ' 
 laer . how now ? what nois is that ? 
 
 enter ophelia . 
 
 o heat , dri up my brain ! tear seven time salt 
 burn out the sens and virtu of mine eye ! 
 by heaven , thi mad shall be paid by weight 
 till our scale turn the beam . o rose of may ! 
 dear maid , kind sister , sweet ophelia ! 
 o heaven ! is't possibl a young maid 's wit 
 should be as mortal as an old man 's life ? 
 natur is fine in love , and where 't is fine , 
 it send some preciou instanc of itself 
 after the thing it love . 
 
 oph . ( sing ) 
 they bore him barefac 'd on the bier 
 ( hey non noni , noni , hey noni ) 
 and in hi grave rain 'd mani a tear . 
 
 fare you well , my dove ! 
 laer . hadst thou thi wit , and didst persuad reveng , 
 it could not move thu . 
 oph . you must sing ' a-down a-down , and you call him a-down-a . ' o , 
 how the wheel becom it ! it is the fals steward , that stole hi 
 master 's daughter . 
 laer . thi noth 's more than matter . 
 oph . there 's rosemari , that 's for remembr . pray you , love , 
 rememb . and there is pansi , that 's for thought . 
 laer . a document in mad ! thought and remembr fit . 
 oph . there 's fennel for you , and columbin . there 's rue for you , 
 and here 's some for me . we may call it herb of grace o ' sunday . 
 o , you must wear your rue with a differ ! there 's a daisi . i 
 would give you some violet , but they wither 'd all when my father 
 die . they say he made a good end . 
 
 [ sing ] for bonni sweet robin is all my joy . 
 
 laer . thought and afflict , passion , hell itself , 
 she turn to favour and to pretti . 
 oph . ( sing ) 
 and will he not come again ? 
 and will he not come again ? 
 no , no , he is dead ; 
 go to thi deathb ; 
 he never will come again . 
 
 hi beard wa as white as snow , 
 all flaxen wa hi poll . 
 he is gone , he is gone , 
 and we cast away moan . 
 god ' a'merci on hi soul ! 
 
 and of all christian soul , i pray god . god b ' wi ' , you . 
 exit . 
 laer . do you see thi , o god ? 
 king . laert , i must commun with your grief , 
 or you deni me right . go but apart , 
 make choic of whom your wisest friend you will , 
 and they shall hear and judg 'twixt you and me . 
 if by direct or by collater hand 
 they find us touch 'd , we will our kingdom give , 
 our crown , our life , and all that we call our , 
 to you in satisfact ; but if not , 
 be you content to lend your patienc to us , 
 and we shall jointli labour with your soul 
 to give it due content . 
 laer . let thi be so . 
 hi mean of death , hi obscur funeral- 
 no trophi , sword , nor hatchment o'er hi bone , 
 no nobl rite nor formal ostent , - 
 cri to be heard , as 'twere from heaven to earth , 
 that i must call't in question . 
 king . so you shall ; 
 and where th ' offenc is let the great axe fall . 
 i pray you go with me . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 elsinor . anoth room in the castl . 
 
 enter horatio with an attend . 
 
 hor . what are they that would speak with me ? 
 servant . seafar men , sir . they say they have letter for you . 
 hor . let them come in . 
 [ exit attend . ] 
 i do not know from what part of the world 
 i should be greet , if not from lord hamlet . 
 
 enter sailor . 
 
 sailor . god bless you , sir . 
 hor . let him bless thee too . 
 sailor . ' a shall , sir , a n't pleas him . there 's a letter for you , 
 sir , - it come from th ' ambassador that wa bound for england- if 
 your name be horatio , as i am let to know it is . 
 hor . ( read the letter ) 'horatio , when thou shalt have overlook 'd 
 thi , give these fellow some mean to the king . they have 
 letter for him . ere we were two day old at sea , a pirat of 
 veri warlik appoint gave us chase . find ourselv too 
 slow of sail , we put on a compel valour , and in the grappl i 
 board them . on the instant they got clear of our ship ; so i 
 alon becam their prison . they have dealt with me like thiev 
 of merci ; but they knew what they did : i am to do a good turn for 
 them . let the king have the letter i have sent , and repair thou 
 to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fli death . i have word 
 to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb ; yet are they much too 
 light for the bore of the matter . these good fellow will bring 
 thee where i am . rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their cours 
 for england . of them i have much to tell thee . farewel . 
 'he that thou knowest thine , hamlet . ' 
 
 come , i will give you way for these your letter , 
 and do't the speedier that you may direct me 
 to him from whom you brought them . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 elsinor . anoth room in the castl . 
 
 enter king and laert . 
 
 king . now must your conscienc my acquitt seal , 
 and you must put me in your heart for friend , 
 sith you have heard , and with a know ear , 
 that he which hath your nobl father slain 
 pursu my life . 
 laer . it well appear . but tell me 
 whi you proceed not against these feat 
 so crime and so capit in natur , 
 as by your safeti , wisdom , all thing els , 
 you mainli were stirr 'd up . 
 king . o , for two special reason , 
 which may to you , perhap , seein much unsinew 'd , 
 but yet to me they are strong . the queen hi mother 
 live almost by hi look ; and for myself , - 
 my virtu or my plagu , be it either which , - 
 she 's so conjunct to my life and soul 
 that , as the star move not but in hi sphere , 
 i could not but by her . the other motiv 
 whi to a public count i might not go 
 is the great love the gener gender bear him , 
 who , dip all hi fault in their affect , 
 would , like the spring that turneth wood to stone , 
 convert hi give to grace ; so that my arrow , 
 too slightli timber 'd for so loud a wind , 
 would have revert to my bow again , 
 and not where i had aim 'd them . 
 laer . and so have i a nobl father lost ; 
 a sister driven into desp'rat term , 
 whose worth , if prais may go back again , 
 stood challeng on mount of all the age 
 for her perfect . but my reveng will come . 
 king . break not your sleep for that . you must not think 
 that we are made of stuff so flat and dull 
 that we can let our beard be shook with danger , 
 and think it pastim . you shortli shall hear more . 
 i lov 'd your father , and we love ourself , 
 and that , i hope , will teach you to imagine- 
 
 enter a messeng with letter . 
 
 how now ? what news ? 
 mess . letter , my lord , from hamlet : 
 thi to your majesti ; thi to the queen . 
 king . from hamlet ? who brought them ? 
 mess . sailor , my lord , they say ; i saw them not . 
 they were given me by claudio ; he receiv 'd them 
 of him that brought them . 
 king . laert , you shall hear them . 
 leav us . 
 exit messeng . 
 [ read ] 'high and mighti , -you shall know i am set nake on your 
 kingdom . to-morrow shall i beg leav to see your kingli eye ; 
 when i shall ( first ask your pardon thereunto ) recount the 
 occas of my sudden and more strang return . 
 'hamlet . ' 
 what should thi mean ? are all the rest come back ? 
 or is it some abus , and no such thing ? 
 laer . know you the hand ? 
 king . 't is hamlet 's charact . 'nake ! ' 
 and in a postscript here , he say 'alon . ' 
 can you advis me ? 
 laer . i am lost in it , my lord . but let him come ! 
 it warm the veri sick in my heart 
 that i shall live and tell him to hi teeth , 
 'thu didest thou . ' 
 king . if it be so , laert 
 ( as how should it be so ? how otherwis ? ) , 
 will you be rul 'd by me ? 
 laer . ay my lord , 
 so you will not o'errul me to a peac . 
 king . to thine own peac . if he be now return 'd 
 as check at hi voyag , and that he mean 
 no more to undertak it , i will work him 
 to exploit now ripe in my devic , 
 under the which he shall not choos but fall ; 
 and for hi death no wind 
 but even hi mother shall uncharg the practic 
 and call it accid . 
 laer . my lord , i will be rul 'd ; 
 the rather , if you could devis it so 
 that i might be the organ . 
 king . it fall right . 
 you have been talk 'd of sinc your travel much , 
 and that in hamlet 's hear , for a qualiti 
 wherein they say you shine , your sun of part 
 did not togeth pluck such envi from him 
 as did that one ; and that , in my regard , 
 of the unworthiest sieg . 
 laer . what part is that , my lord ? 
 king . a veri riband in the cap of youth- 
 yet needful too ; for youth no less becom 
 the light and careless liveri that it wear 
 thin settl age hi sabl and hi weed , 
 import health and grave . two month sinc 
 here wa a gentleman of normandi . 
 i have seen myself , and serv 'd against , the french , 
 and they can well on horseback ; but thi gallant 
 had witchcraft i n't . he grew unto hi seat , 
 and to such wondrou do brought hi hors 
 as had he been incorp 'd and demi-natur 'd 
 with the brave beast . so far he topp 'd my thought 
 that i , in forgeri of shape and trick , 
 come short of what he did . 
 laer . a norman was't ? 
 king . a norman . 
 laer . upon my life , lamound . 
 king . the veri same . 
 laer . i know him well . he is the broach inde 
 and gem of all the nation . 
 king . he made confess of you ; 
 and gave you such a masterli report 
 for art and exercis in your defenc , 
 and for your rapier most especi , 
 that he cri out 'twould be a sight inde 
 if one could match you . the scrimer of their nation 
 he swore had neither motion , guard , nor eye , 
 if you oppo 'd them . sir , thi report of hi 
 did hamlet so envenom with hi envi 
 that he could noth do but wish and beg 
 your sudden come o'er to play with you . 
 now , out of this- 
 laer . what out of thi , my lord ? 
 king . laert , wa your father dear to you ? 
 or are you like the paint of a sorrow , 
 a face without a heart , ' 
 laer . whi ask you thi ? 
 king . not that i think you did not love your father ; 
 but that i know love is begun by time , 
 and that i see , in passag of proof , 
 time qualifi the spark and fire of it . 
 there live within the veri flame of love 
 a kind of wick or snuff that will abat it ; 
 and noth is at a like good still ; 
 for good , grow to a plurisi , 
 die in hi own too-much . that we would do , 
 we should do when we would ; for thi 'would ' chang , 
 and hath abat and delay as mani 
 as there are tongu , are hand , are accid ; 
 and then thi 'should ' is like a spendthrift sigh , 
 that hurt by eas . but to the quick o ' th ' ulcer ! 
 hamlet come back . what would you undertak 
 to show yourself your father 's son in deed 
 more than in word ? 
 laer . to cut hi throat i ' th ' church ! 
 king . no place inde should murther sanctuar ; 
 reveng should have no bound . but , good laert , 
 will you do thi ? keep close within your chamber . 
 will return 'd shall know you are come home . 
 we 'll put on those shall prais your excel 
 and set a doubl varnish on the fame 
 the frenchman gave you ; bring you in fine togeth 
 and wager on your head . he , be remiss , 
 most gener , and free from all contriv , 
 will not perus the foil ; so that with eas , 
 or with a littl shuffl , you may choos 
 a sword unbat , and , in a pass of practic , 
 requit him for your father . 
 laer . i will do't ! 
 and for that purpos i 'll anoint my sword . 
 i bought an unction of a mountebank , 
 so mortal that , but dip a knife in it , 
 where it draw blood no cataplasm so rare , 
 collect from all simpl that have virtu 
 under the moon , can save the thing from death 
 thi is but scratch 'd withal . i 'll touch my point 
 with thi contagion , that , if i gall him slightli , 
 it may be death . 
 king . let 's further think of thi , 
 weigh what conveni both of time and mean 
 may fit us to our shape . if thi should fall , 
 and that our drift look through our bad perform . 
 'twere better not assay 'd . therefor thi project 
 should have a back or second , that might hold 
 if thi did blast in proof . soft ! let me see . 
 we 'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings- 
 i ha't ! 
 when in your motion you are hot and dry- 
 as make your bout more violent to that end- 
 and that he call for drink , i 'll have prepar 'd him 
 a chalic for the nonc ; whereon but sip , 
 if he by chanc escap your venom 'd stuck , 
 our purpos may hold there.- but stay , what nois , 
 
 enter queen . 
 
 how now , sweet queen ? 
 queen . one woe doth tread upon anoth 's heel , 
 so fast they follow . your sister 's drown 'd , laert . 
 laer . drown 'd ! o , where ? 
 queen . there is a willow grow aslant a brook , 
 that show hi hoar leav in the glassi stream . 
 there with fantast garland did she come 
 of crowflow , nettl , daisi , and long purpl , 
 that liber shepherd give a grosser name , 
 but our cold maid do dead men 's finger call them . 
 there on the pendant bough her coronet weed 
 clamb'r to hang , an enviou sliver broke , 
 when down her weedi trophi and herself 
 fell in the weep brook . her cloth spread wide 
 and , mermaid-lik , awhil they bore her up ; 
 which time she chaunt snatch of old tune , 
 as one incap of her own distress , 
 or like a creatur nativ and indu 
 unto that element ; but long it could not be 
 till that her garment , heavi with their drink , 
 pull 'd the poor wretch from her melodi lay 
 to muddi death . 
 laer . ala , then she is drown 'd ? 
 queen . drown 'd , drown 'd . 
 laer . too much of water hast thou , poor ophelia , 
 and therefor i forbid my tear ; but yet 
 it is our trick ; natur her custom hold , 
 let shame say what it will . when these are gone , 
 the woman will be out . adieu , my lord . 
 i have a speech of fire , that fain would blaze 
 but that thi folli dout it . exit . 
 king . let 's follow , gertrud . 
 how much i had to do to calm hi rage i 
 now fear i thi will give it start again ; 
 therefor let 's follow . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 elsinor . a churchyard . 
 
 enter two clown , [ with spade and pickax ] . 
 
 clown . is she to be buri in christian burial when she wil 
 seek her own salvat ? 
 other . i tell thee she is ; therefor make her grave straight . 
 the crowner hath sate on her , and find it christian burial . 
 clown . how can that be , unless she drown 'd herself in her own 
 defenc ? 
 other . whi , 't is found so . 
 clown . it must be se offendendo ; it can not be els . for here lie 
 the point : if i drown myself wittingli , it argu an act ; and an 
 act hath three branches-it is to act , to do , and to perform ; 
 argal , she drown 'd herself wittingli . 
 other . nay , but hear you , goodman delver ! 
 clown . give me leav . here lie the water ; good . here stand the 
 man ; good . if the man go to thi water and drown himself , it is , 
 will he nill he , he goes- mark you that . but if the water come to 
 him and drown him , he drown not himself . argal , he that is not 
 guilti of hi own death shorten not hi own life . 
 other . but is thi law ? 
 clown . ay , marri , is't- crowner 's quest law . 
 other . will you ha ' the truth a n't ? if thi had not been a 
 gentlewoman , she should have been buri out o ' christian burial . 
 clown . whi , there thou say'st ! and the more piti that great folk 
 should have count'nanc in thi world to drown or hang themselv 
 more than their even-christen . come , my spade ! there is no 
 ancient gentlemen but gard'ner , ditcher , and grave-mak . they 
 hold up adam 's profess . 
 other . wa he a gentleman ? 
 clown . ' a wa the first that ever bore arm . 
 other . whi , he had none . 
 clown . what , art a heathen ? how dost thou understand the scriptur ? 
 the scriptur say adam digg 'd . could he dig without arm ? i 'll 
 put anoth question to thee . if thou answerest me not to the 
 purpos , confess thyself- 
 other . go to ! 
 clown . what is he that build stronger than either the mason , the 
 shipwright , or the carpent ? 
 other . the gallows-mak ; for that frame outliv a thousand 
 tenant . 
 clown . i like thi wit well , in good faith . the gallow doe well . 
 but how doe it well ? it doe well to those that do ill. now , 
 thou dost ill to say the gallow is built stronger than the 
 church . argal , the gallow may do well to thee . to't again , come ! 
 other . who build stronger than a mason , a shipwright , or a 
 carpent ? 
 clown . ay , tell me that , and unyok . 
 other . marri , now i can tell ! 
 clown . to't . 
 other . mass , i can not tell . 
 
 enter hamlet and horatio afar off . 
 
 clown . cudgel thi brain no more about it , for your dull ass will 
 not mend hi pace with beat ; and when you are ask 'd thi 
 question next , say ' a grave-mak . ' the hous he make last 
 till doomsday . go , get thee to yaughan ; fetch me a stoup of 
 liquor . 
 [ exit second clown . ] 
 
 [ clown dig and ] sing . 
 
 in youth when i did love , did love , 
 methought it wa veri sweet ; 
 to contract- o- the time for- a- my behov , 
 o , methought there- a- wa nothing- a- meet . 
 
 ham . ha thi fellow no feel of hi busi , that he sing at 
 grave-mak ? 
 hor . custom hath made it in him a properti of easi . 
 ham . 't is e'en so . the hand of littl employ hath the daintier 
 sens . 
 clown . ( sing ) 
 but age with hi steal step 
 hath claw me in hi clutch , 
 and hath ship me intil the land , 
 as if i had never been such . 
 [ throw up a skull . ] 
 
 ham . that skull had a tongu in it , and could sing onc . how the 
 knave jowl it to the ground , as if 'twere cain 's jawbon , that 
 did the first murther ! thi might be the pate of a politician , 
 which thi ass now o'erreach ; one that would circumv god , 
 might it not ? 
 hor . it might , my lord . 
 ham . or of a courtier , which could say 'good morrow , sweet lord ! 
 how dost thou , good lord ? ' thi might be my lord such-a-on , that 
 prai 'd my lord such-a-on 's hors when he meant to beg it- might 
 it not ? 
 hor . ay , my lord . 
 ham . whi , e'en so ! and now my ladi worm 's , chapless , and knock 'd 
 about the mazzard with a sexton 's spade . here 's fine revolut , 
 and we had the trick to see't . did these bone cost no more the 
 breed but to play at logget with 'em ? mine ach to think 
 o n't . 
 clown . ( sing ) 
 a pickax and a spade , a spade , 
 for and a shroud sheet ; 
 o , a pit of clay for to be made 
 for such a guest is meet . 
 throw up [ anoth skull ] . 
 
 ham . there 's anoth . whi may not that be the skull of a lawyer ? 
 where be hi quiddit now , hi quillet , hi case , hi tenur , 
 and hi trick ? whi doe he suffer thi rude knave now to knock 
 him about the sconc with a dirti shovel , and will not tell him 
 of hi action of batteri ? hum ! thi fellow might be in 's time a 
 great buyer of land , with hi statut , hi recogniz , hi 
 fine , hi doubl voucher , hi recoveri . is thi the fine of 
 hi fine , and the recoveri of hi recoveri , to have hi fine 
 pate full of fine dirt ? will hi voucher vouch him no more of 
 hi purchas , and doubl one too , than the length and breadth 
 of a pair of indentur ? the veri convey of hi land will 
 scarc lie in thi box ; and must th ' inheritor himself have no 
 more , ha ? 
 hor . not a jot more , my lord . 
 ham . is not parchment made of sheepskin ? 
 hor . ay , my lord , and of calveskin too . 
 ham . they are sheep and calv which seek out assur in that . i 
 will speak to thi fellow . whose grave 's thi , sirrah ? 
 clown . mine , sir . 
 
 [ sing ] o , a pit of clay for to be made 
 for such a guest is meet . 
 
 ham . i think it be thine inde , for thou liest i n't . 
 clown . you lie out o n't , sir , and therefor 't is not your . 
 for my part , i do not lie i n't , yet it is mine . 
 ham . thou dost lie i n't , to be i n't and say it is thine . 't is for 
 the dead , not for the quick ; therefor thou liest . 
 clown . 't is a quick lie , sir ; 'twill away again from me to you . 
 ham . what man dost thou dig it for ? 
 clown . for no man , sir . 
 ham . what woman then ? 
 clown . for none neither . 
 ham . who is to be buri i n't ? 
 clown . one that wa a woman , sir ; but , rest her soul , she 's dead . 
 ham . how absolut the knave is ! we must speak by the card , or 
 equivoc will undo us . by the lord , horatio , thi three year 
 i have taken note of it , the age is grown so pick that the toe 
 of the peasant come so near the heel of the courtier he gall 
 hi kibe.- how long hast thou been a grave-mak ? 
 clown . of all the day i ' th ' year , i came to't that day that our 
 last king hamlet overcam fortinbra . 
 ham . how long is that sinc ? 
 clown . can not you tell that ? everi fool can tell that . it wa the 
 veri day that young hamlet wa born- he that is mad , and sent 
 into england . 
 ham . ay , marri , whi wa be sent into england ? 
 clown . whi , becaus ' a wa mad . ' a shall recov hi wit there ; 
 or , if ' a do not , 't is no great matter there . 
 ham . whi ? 
 clown . 'twill not he seen in him there . there the men are as mad as 
 he . 
 ham . how came he mad ? 
 clown . veri strang , they say . 
 ham . how strang ? 
 clown . faith , e'en with lose hi wit . 
 ham . upon what ground ? 
 clown . whi , here in denmark . i have been sexton here , man and boy 
 thirti year . 
 ham . how long will a man lie i ' th ' earth ere he rot ? 
 clown . faith , if ' a be not rotten befor ' a die ( as we have mani 
 pocki cors now-a-day that will scarc hold the lay in , i 
 will last you some eight year or nine year . a tanner will last 
 you nine year . 
 ham . whi he more than anoth ? 
 clown . whi , sir , hi hide is so tann 'd with hi trade that ' a will 
 keep out water a great while ; and your water is a sore decay of 
 your whoreson dead bodi . here 's a skull now . thi skull hath lien 
 you i ' th ' earth three-and-twenti year . 
 ham . whose wa it ? 
 clown . a whoreson , mad fellow 's it wa . whose do you think it wa ? 
 ham . nay , i know not . 
 clown . a pestil on him for a mad rogu ! ' a pour 'd a flagon of 
 rhenish on my head onc . thi same skull , sir , wa yorick 's 
 skull , the king 's jester . 
 ham . thi ? 
 clown . e'en that . 
 ham . let me see . [ take the skull . ] ala , poor yorick ! i knew him , 
 horatio . a fellow of infinit jest , of most excel fanci . he 
 hath born me on hi back a thousand tune . and now how abhor 
 in my imagin it is ! my gorg rise at it . here hung those 
 lip that i have kiss 'd i know not how oft . where be your gibe 
 now ? your gambol ? your song ? your flash of merriment that 
 were wont to set the tabl on a roar ? not one now , to mock your 
 own grin ? quit chap- fall'n ? now get you to my ladi 's 
 chamber , and tell her , let her paint an inch thick , to thi 
 favour she must come . make her laugh at that . prithe , horatio , 
 tell me one thing . 
 hor . what 's that , my lord ? 
 ham . dost thou think alexand look 'd o ' thi fashion i ' th ' earth ? 
 hor . e'en so . 
 ham . and smelt so ? pah ! 
 [ put down the skull . ] 
 hor . e'en so , my lord . 
 ham . to what base use we may return , horatio ! whi may not 
 imagin trace the nobl dust of alexand till he find it 
 stop a bunghol ? 
 hor . 'twere to consid too curious , to consid so . 
 ham . no , faith , not a jot ; but to follow him thither with modesti 
 enough , and likelihood to lead it ; as thu : alexand die , 
 alexand wa buri , alexand returneth into dust ; the dust is 
 earth ; of earth we make loam ; and whi of that loam ( whereto he 
 wa convert ) might they not stop a beer barrel ? 
 imperi caesar , dead and turn 'd to clay , 
 might stop a hole to keep the wind away . 
 o , that that earth which kept the world in awe 
 should patch a wall t ' expel the winter 's flaw ! 
 but soft ! but soft ! asid ! here come the king- 
 
 enter [ priest with ] a coffin [ in funer process ] , king , 
 queen , laert , with lord attend . ] 
 
 the queen , the courtier . who is thi they follow ? 
 and with such maim rite ? thi doth betoken 
 the cors they follow did with desp'rat hand 
 fordo it own life . 't wa of some estat . 
 couch we awhil , and mark . 
 [ retir with horatio . ] 
 laer . what ceremoni els ? 
 ham . that is laert , 
 a veri nobl youth . mark . 
 laer . what ceremoni els ? 
 priest . her obsequi have been as far enlarg 'd 
 as we have warranti . her death wa doubt ; 
 and , but that great command o'ersway the order , 
 she should in ground unsanctifi have lodg 'd 
 till the last trumpet . for charit prayer , 
 shard , flint , and pebbl should be thrown on her . 
 yet here she is allow 'd her virgin crant , 
 her maiden strewment , and the bring home 
 of bell and burial . 
 laer . must there no more be done ? 
 priest . no more be done . 
 we should profan the servic of the dead 
 to sing a requiem and such rest to her 
 as to peace-part soul . 
 laer . lay her i ' th ' earth ; 
 and from her fair and unpollut flesh 
 may violet spring ! i tell thee , churlish priest , 
 a minist'r angel shall my sister be 
 when thou liest howl . 
 ham . what , the fair ophelia ? 
 queen . sweet to the sweet ! farewel . 
 [ scatter flower . ] 
 i hop 'd thou shouldst have been my hamlet 's wife ; 
 i thought thi bride-b to have deck 'd , sweet maid , 
 and not have strew 'd thi grave . 
 laer . o , trebl woe 
 fall ten time trebl on that curs head 
 whose wick deed thi most ingeni sens 
 depriv 'd thee of ! hold off the earth awhil , 
 till i have caught her onc more in mine arm . 
 leap in the grave . 
 now pile your dust upon the quick and dead 
 till of thi flat a mountain you have made 
 t ' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head 
 of blue olympu . 
 ham . [ come forward ] what is he whose grief 
 bear such an emphasi ? whose phrase of sorrow 
 conjur the wand'r star , and make them stand 
 like wonder-wound hearer ? thi is i , 
 hamlet the dane . [ leap in after laert . 
 laer . the devil take thi soul ! 
 [ grappl with him ] . 
 ham . thou pray'st not well . 
 i prithe take thi finger from my throat ; 
 for , though i am not splenit and rash , 
 yet have i in me someth danger , 
 which let thi wisdom fear . hold off thi hand ! 
 king . pluck thein asund . 
 queen . hamlet , hamlet ! 
 all . gentlemen ! 
 hor . good my lord , be quiet . 
 [ the attend part them , and they come out of the 
 grave . ] 
 ham . whi , i will fight with him upon thi theme 
 until my eyelid will no longer wag . 
 queen . o my son , what theme ? 
 ham . i lov 'd ophelia . forti thousand brother 
 could not ( with all their quantiti of love ) 
 make up my sum . what wilt thou do for her ? 
 king . o , he is mad , laert . 
 queen . for love of god , forbear him ! 
 ham . 'swound , show me what thou't do . 
 woo't weep ? woo't fight ? woo't fast ? woo't tear thyself ? 
 woo't drink up esil ? eat a crocodil ? 
 i 'll do't . dost thou come here to whine ? 
 to outfac me with leap in her grave ? 
 be buri quick with her , and so will i . 
 and if thou prate of mountain , let them throw 
 million of acr on us , till our ground , 
 sing hi pate against the burn zone , 
 make ossa like a wart ! nay , an thou'lt mouth , 
 i 'll rant as well as thou . 
 queen . thi is mere mad ; 
 and thu a while the fit will work on him . 
 anon , as patient as the femal dove 
 when that her golden couplet are disclo 'd , 
 hi silenc will sit droop . 
 ham . hear you , sir ! 
 what is the reason that you use me thu ? 
 i lov 'd you ever . but it is no matter . 
 let hercul himself do what he may , 
 the cat will mew , and dog will have hi day . 
 exit . 
 king . i pray thee , good horatio , wait upon him . 
 exit horatio . 
 [ to laert ] strengthen your patienc in our last night 's speech . 
 we 'll put the matter to the present push.- 
 good gertrud , set some watch over your son.- 
 thi grave shall have a live monument . 
 an hour of quiet shortli shall we see ; 
 till then in patienc our proceed be . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 elsinor . a hall in the castl . 
 
 enter hamlet and horatio . 
 
 ham . so much for thi , sir ; now shall you see the other . 
 you do rememb all the circumst ? 
 hor . rememb it , my lord ! 
 ham . sir , in my heart there wa a kind of fight 
 that would not let me sleep . methought i lay 
 wors than the mutini in the bilbo . rashly- 
 and prai 'd be rash for it ; let us know , 
 our indiscret sometim serv us well 
 when our deep plot do pall ; and that should learn us 
 there 's a divin that shape our end , 
 rough-hew them how we will- 
 hor . that is most certain . 
 ham . up from my cabin , 
 my sea-gown scarf 'd about me , in the dark 
 grop 'd i to find out them ; had my desir , 
 finger 'd their packet , and in fine withdrew 
 to mine own room again ; make so bold 
 ( my fear forget manner ) to unseal 
 their grand commiss ; where i found , horatio 
 ( o royal knaveri ! ) , an exact command , 
 lard with mani sever sort of reason , 
 import denmark 's health , and england 's too , 
 with , hoo ! such bug and goblin in my life- 
 that , on the supervis , no leisur bate , 
 no , not to stay the find of the axe , 
 my head should be struck off . 
 hor . is't possibl ? 
 ham . here 's the commiss ; read it at more leisur . 
 but wilt thou bear me how i did proceed ? 
 hor . i beseech you . 
 ham . be thu benet round with villani , 
 or i could make a prologu to my brain , 
 they had begun the play . i sat me down ; 
 devi 'd a new commiss ; wrote it fair . 
 i onc did hold it , as our statist do , 
 a base to write fair , and labour 'd much 
 how to forget that learn ; but , sir , now 
 it did me yeoman 's servic . wilt thou know 
 th ' effect of what i wrote ? 
 hor . ay , good my lord . 
 ham . an earnest conjur from the king , 
 as england wa hi faith tributari , 
 as love between them like the palm might flourish , 
 as peac should still her wheaten garland wear 
 and stand a comma 'tween their amiti , 
 and mani such-lik as 's of great charg , 
 that , on the view and know of these content , 
 without debat further , more or less , 
 he should the bearer put to sudden death , 
 not shrive time allow 'd . 
 hor . how wa thi seal 'd ? 
 ham . whi , even in that wa heaven ordin . 
 i had my father 's signet in my purs , 
 which wa the model of that danish seal ; 
 fold the writ up in the form of th ' other , 
 subscrib 'd it , gave't th ' impress , plac 'd it safe , 
 the changel never known . now , the next day 
 wa our sea-fight ; and what to thi wa sequent 
 thou know'st alreadi . 
 hor . so guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't . 
 ham . whi , man , they did make love to thi employ ! 
 they are not near my conscienc ; their defeat 
 doe by their own insinu grow . 
 't is danger when the baser natur come 
 between the pass and fell incens point 
 of mighti opposit . 
 hor . whi , what a king is thi ! 
 ham . doe it not , thinks't thee , stand me now upon- 
 he that hath kill 'd my king , and whor 'd my mother ; 
 popp 'd in between th ' elect and my hope ; 
 thrown out hi angl for my proper life , 
 and with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscienc 
 to quit him with thi arm ? and is't not to be damn 'd 
 to let thi canker of our natur come 
 in further evil ? 
 hor . it must be shortli known to him from england 
 what is the issu of the busi there . 
 ham . it will be short ; the interim is mine , 
 and a man 's life is no more than to say 'one . ' 
 but i am veri sorri , good horatio , 
 that to laert i forgot myself , 
 for by the imag of my caus i see 
 the portraitur of hi . i 'll court hi favour . 
 but sure the braveri of hi grief did put me 
 into a tow'r passion . 
 hor . peac ! who come here ? 
 
 enter young osric , a courtier . 
 
 osr . your lordship is right welcom back to denmark . 
 ham . i humbl thank you , sir . [ asid to horatio ] dost know thi 
 waterfli ? 
 hor . [ asid to hamlet ] no , my good lord . 
 ham . [ asid to horatio ] thi state is the more graciou ; for 't is a 
 vice to know him . he hath much land , and fertil . let a beast be 
 lord of beast , and hi crib shall stand at the king 's mess . 't is 
 a chough ; but , as i say , spaciou in the possess of dirt . 
 osr . sweet lord , if your lordship were at leisur , i should impart 
 a thing to you from hi majesti . 
 ham . i will receiv it , sir , with all dilig of spirit . put your 
 bonnet to hi right use . 't is for the head . 
 osr . i thank your lordship , it is veri hot . 
 ham . no , believ me , 't is veri cold ; the wind is northerli . 
 osr . it is indiffer cold , my lord , inde . 
 ham . but yet methink it is veri sultri and hot for my complexion . 
 osr . exceedingli , my lord ; it is veri sultri , as 'twere- i can not 
 tell how . but , my lord , hi majesti bade me signifi to you that 
 he ha laid a great wager on your head . sir , thi is the matter- 
 ham . i beseech you rememb . 
 [ hamlet move him to put on hi hat . ] 
 osr . nay , good my lord ; for mine eas , in good faith . sir , here is 
 newli come to court laert ; believ me , an absolut gentleman , 
 full of most excel differ , of veri soft societi and 
 great show . inde , to speak feelingli of him , he is the card 
 or calendar of gentri ; for you shall find in him the contin of 
 what part a gentleman would see . 
 ham . sir , hi defin suffer no perdit in you ; though , i 
 know , to divid him inventori would dozi th ' arithmet of 
 memori , and yet but yaw neither in respect of hi quick sail . 
 but , in the veriti of extol , i take him to be a soul of great 
 articl , and hi infus of such dearth and rare as , to make 
 true diction of him , hi semblabl is hi mirror , and who els 
 would trace him , hi umbrag , noth more . 
 osr . your lordship speak most infal of him . 
 ham . the concern , sir ? whi do we wrap the gentleman in our more 
 rawer breath 
 osr . sir ? 
 hor [ asid to hamlet ] is't not possibl to understand in anoth 
 tongu ? you will do't , sir , realli . 
 ham . what import the nomin of thi gentleman 
 osr . of laert ? 
 hor . [ asid ] hi purs is empti alreadi . all 's golden word are 
 spent . 
 ham . of him , sir . 
 osr . i know you are not ignorant- 
 ham . i would you did , sir ; yet , in faith , if you did , it would not 
 much approv me . well , sir ? 
 osr . you are not ignor of what excel laert is- 
 ham . i dare not confess that , lest i should compar with him in 
 excel ; but to know a man well were to know himself . 
 osr . i mean , sir , for hi weapon ; but in the imput laid on him 
 by them , in hi meed he 's unfellow . 
 ham . what 's hi weapon ? 
 osr . rapier and dagger . 
 ham . that 's two of hi weapons- but well . 
 osr . the king , sir , hath wager 'd with him six barbari hors ; 
 against the which he ha impon 'd , as i take it , six french 
 rapier and poniard , with their assign , as girdl , hanger , and 
 so . three of the carriag , in faith , are veri dear to fanci , 
 veri respons to the hilt , most delic carriag , and of 
 veri liber conceit . 
 ham . what call you the carriag ? 
 hor . [ asid to hamlet ] i knew you must be edifi by the margent 
 ere you had done . 
 osr . the carriag , sir , are the hanger . 
 ham . the phrase would be more german to the matter if we could 
 carri cannon by our side . i would it might be hanger till then . 
 but on ! six barbari hors against six french sword , their 
 assign , and three liberal-conceit carriag : that 's the french 
 bet against the danish . whi is thi all impon 'd , as you call it ? 
 osr . the king , sir , hath laid that , in a dozen pass between 
 yourself and him , he shall not exceed you three hit ; he hath 
 laid on twelv for nine , and it would come to immedi trial 
 if your lordship would vouchsaf the answer . 
 ham . how if i answer no ? 
 osr . i mean , my lord , the opposit of your person in trial . 
 ham . sir , i will walk here in the hall . if it pleas hi majesti , 
 it is the breath time of day with me . let the foil be 
 brought , the gentleman will , and the king hold hi purpos , 
 i will win for him if i can ; if not , i will gain noth but my 
 shame and the odd hit . 
 osr . shall i redeliv you e'en so ? 
 ham . to thi effect , sir , after what flourish your natur will . 
 osr . i commend my duti to your lordship . 
 ham . your , your . [ exit osric . ] he doe well to commend it 
 himself ; there are no tongu els for 's turn . 
 hor . thi lapw run away with the shell on hi head . 
 ham . he did compli with hi dug befor he suck 'd it . thu ha he , 
 and mani more of the same bevi that i know the drossi age dote 
 on , onli got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter- 
 a kind of yesti collect , which carri them through and 
 through the most fann 'd and winnow opinion ; and do but blow 
 them to their trial-th bubbl are out , 
 
 enter a lord . 
 
 lord . my lord , hi majesti commend him to you by young osric , who 
 bring back to him , that you attend him in the hall . he send to 
 know if your pleasur hold to play with laert , or that you will 
 take longer time . 
 ham . i am constant to my purpos ; they follow the king 's pleasur . 
 if hi fit speak , mine is readi ; now or whensoev , provid 
 i be so abl as now . 
 lord . the king and queen and all are come down . 
 ham . in happi time . 
 lord . the queen desir you to use some gentl entertain to 
 laert befor you fall to play . 
 ham . she well instruct me . 
 [ exit lord . ] 
 hor . you will lose thi wager , my lord . 
 ham . i do not think so . sinc he went into franc i have been in 
 continu practic . i shall win at the odd . but thou wouldst not 
 think how ill all 's here about my heart . but it is no matter . 
 hor . nay , good my lord - 
 ham . it is but fooleri ; but it is such a kind of gaingiv as 
 would perhap troubl a woman . 
 hor . if your mind dislik anyth , obey it . i will forestal their 
 repair hither and say you are not fit . 
 ham . not a whit , we defi auguri ; there 's a special provid in 
 the fall of a sparrow . if it be now , 't is not to come ' , if it be 
 not to come , it will be now ; if it be not now , yet it will come : 
 the readi is all . sinc no man know aught of what he leav , 
 what is't to leav betim ? let be . 
 
 enter king , queen , laert , osric , and lord , with other 
 attend with foil and gauntlet . 
 a tabl and flagon of wine on it . 
 
 king . come , hamlet , come , and take thi hand from me . 
 [ the king put laert ' hand into hamlet 's . ] 
 ham . give me your pardon , sir . i have done you wrong ; 
 but pardo n't , as you are a gentleman . 
 thi presenc know , 
 and you must need have heard , how i am punish 'd 
 with sore distract . what i have done 
 that might your natur , honour , and except 
 roughli awak , i here proclaim wa mad . 
 was't hamlet wrong 'd laert ? never hamlet . 
 if hamlet from himself be taken away , 
 and when he 's not himself doe wrong laert , 
 then hamlet doe it not , hamlet deni it . 
 who doe it , then ? hi mad . if't be so , 
 hamlet is of the faction that is wrong 'd ; 
 hi mad is poor hamlet 's enemi . 
 sir , in thi audienc , 
 let my disclaim from a purpo 'd evil 
 free me so far in your most gener thought 
 that i have shot my arrow o'er the hous 
 and hurt my brother . 
 laer . i am satisfi in natur , 
 whose motiv in thi case should stir me most 
 to my reveng . but in my term of honour 
 i stand aloof , and will no reconcil 
 till by some elder master of known honour 
 i have a voic and preced of peac 
 to keep my name ungor 'd . but till that time 
 i do receiv your offer 'd love like love , 
 and will not wrong it . 
 ham . i embrac it freeli , 
 and will thi brother 's wager frankli play . 
 give us the foil . come on . 
 laer . come , one for me . 
 ham . i 'll be your foil , laert . in mine ignor 
 your skill shall , like a star i ' th ' darkest night , 
 stick fieri off inde . 
 laer . you mock me , sir . 
 ham . no , by thi bad . 
 king . give them the foil , young osric . cousin hamlet , 
 you know the wager ? 
 ham . veri well , my lord . 
 your grace ha laid the odd o ' th ' weaker side . 
 king . i do not fear it , i have seen you both ; 
 but sinc he is better 'd , we have therefor odd . 
 laer . thi is too heavi ; let me see anoth . 
 ham . thi like me well . these foil have all a length ? 
 prepar to play . 
 osr . ay , my good lord . 
 king . set me the stoup of wine upon that tabl . 
 if hamlet give the first or second hit , 
 or quit in answer of the third exchang , 
 let all the battlement their ordnanc fire ; 
 the king shall drink to hamlet 's better breath , 
 and in the cup an union shall he throw 
 richer than that which four success king 
 in denmark 's crown have worn . give me the cup ; 
 and let the kettl to the trumpet speak , 
 the trumpet to the cannon without , 
 the cannon to the heaven , the heaven to earth , 
 'now the king drink to hamlet . ' come , begin . 
 and you the judg , bear a wari eye . 
 ham . come on , sir . 
 laer . come , my lord . they play . 
 ham . one . 
 laer . no . 
 ham . judgment ! 
 osr . a hit , a veri palpabl hit . 
 laer . well , again ! 
 king . stay , give me drink . hamlet , thi pearl is thine ; 
 here 's to thi health . 
 [ drum ; trumpet sound ; a piec goe off [ within ] . 
 give him the cup . 
 ham . i 'll play thi bout first ; set it by awhil . 
 come . ( they play . ) anoth hit . what say you ? 
 laer . a touch , a touch ; i do confess't . 
 king . our son shall win . 
 queen . he 's fat , and scant of breath . 
 here , hamlet , take my napkin , rub thi brow . 
 the queen carous to thi fortun , hamlet . 
 ham . good madam ! 
 king . gertrud , do not drink . 
 queen . i will , my lord ; i pray you pardon me . drink . 
 king . [ asid ] it is the poison 'd cup ; it is too late . 
 ham . i dare not drink yet , madam ; by-and-bi . 
 queen . come , let me wipe thi face . 
 laer . my lord , i 'll hit him now . 
 king . i do not think't . 
 laer . [ asid ] and yet it is almost against my conscienc . 
 ham . come for the third , laert ! you but dalli . 
 pray you pass with your best violenc ; 
 i am afeard you make a wanton of me . 
 laer . say you so ? come on . play . 
 osr . noth neither way . 
 laer . have at you now ! 
 [ laert wound hamlet ; then ] in scuffl , they 
 chang rapier , [ and hamlet wound laert ] . 
 king . part them ! they are incen 'd . 
 ham . nay come ! again ! the queen fall . 
 osr . look to the queen there , ho ! 
 hor . they bleed on both side . how is it , my lord ? 
 osr . how is't , laert ? 
 laer . whi , as a woodcock to mine own spring , osric . 
 i am justli kill 'd with mine own treacheri . 
 ham . how doe the queen ? 
 king . she sound to see them bleed . 
 queen . no , no ! the drink , the drink ! o my dear hamlet ! 
 the drink , the drink ! i am poison 'd . [ die . ] 
 ham . o villani ! ho ! let the door be lock 'd . 
 treacheri ! seek it out . 
 [ laert fall . ] 
 laer . it is here , hamlet . hamlet , thou art slain ; 
 no medicin in the world can do thee good . 
 in thee there is not half an hour of life . 
 the treacher instrument is in thi hand , 
 unbat and envenom 'd . the foul practic 
 hath turn 'd itself on me . lo , here i lie , 
 never to rise again . thi mother 's poison 'd . 
 i can no more . the king , the king 's to blame . 
 ham . the point envenom 'd too ? 
 then , venom , to thi work . hurt the king . 
 all . treason ! treason ! 
 king . o , yet defend me , friend ! i am but hurt . 
 ham . here , thou incestu , murd'rou , damn dane , 
 drink off thi potion ! is thi union here ? 
 follow my mother . king die . 
 laer . he is justli serv 'd . 
 it is a poison temper 'd by himself . 
 exchang forgiv with me , nobl hamlet . 
 mine and my father 's death come not upon thee , 
 nor thine on me ! die . 
 ham . heaven make thee free of it ! i follow thee . 
 i am dead , horatio . wretch queen , adieu ! 
 you that look pale and trembl at thi chanc , 
 that are but mute or audienc to thi act , 
 had i but time ( as thi fell sergeant , death , 
 is strict in hi arrest ) o , i could tell you- 
 but let it be . horatio , i am dead ; 
 thou liv'st ; report me and my caus aright 
 to the unsatisfi . 
 hor . never believ it . 
 i am more an antiqu roman than a dane . 
 here 's yet some liquor left . 
 ham . as th'art a man , 
 give me the cup . let go ! by heaven , i 'll ha't . 
 o good horatio , what a wound name 
 ( thing stand thu unknown ) shall live behind me ! 
 if thou didst ever hold me in thi heart , 
 absent thee from felic awhil , 
 and in thi harsh world draw thi breath in pain , 
 to tell my stori . [ march afar off , and shot within . ] 
 what warlik nois is thi ? 
 osr . young fortinbra , with conquest come from poland , 
 to the ambassador of england give 
 thi warlik volley . 
 ham . o , i die , horatio ! 
 the potent poison quit o'ercrow my spirit . 
 i can not live to hear the news from england , 
 but i do prophesi th ' elect light 
 on fortinbra . he ha my die voic . 
 so tell him , with th ' occurr , more and less , 
 which have solicited- the rest is silenc . die . 
 hor . now crack a nobl heart . good night , sweet princ , 
 and flight of angel sing thee to thi rest ! 
 [ march within . ] 
 whi doe the drum come hither ? 
 
 enter fortinbra and english ambassador , with drum , 
 colour , and attend . 
 
 fort . where is thi sight ? 
 hor . what is it you will see ? 
 if aught of woe or wonder , ceas your search . 
 fort . thi quarri cri on havoc . o proud death , 
 what feast is toward in thine etern cell 
 that thou so mani princ at a shot 
 so bloodili hast struck . 
 ambassador . the sight is dismal ; 
 and our affair from england come too late . 
 the ear are senseless that should give us bear 
 to tell him hi command is fulfil 'd 
 that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead . 
 where should we have our thank ? 
 hor . not from hi mouth , 
 had it th ' abil of life to thank you . 
 he never gave command for their death . 
 but sinc , so jump upon thi bloodi question , 
 you from the polack war , and you from england , 
 are here arriv 'd , give order that these bodi 
 high on a stage be place to the view ; 
 and let me speak to the yet unknow world 
 how these thing came about . so shall you hear 
 of carnal , bloodi and unnatur act ; 
 of accident judgment , casual slaughter ; 
 of death put on by cun and forc 'd caus ; 
 and , in thi upshot , purpos mistook 
 fall'n on th ' inventor ' head . all thi can i 
 truli deliv . 
 fort . let us hast to hear it , 
 and call the noblest to the audienc . 
 for me , with sorrow i embrac my fortun . 
 i have some right of memori in thi kingdom 
 which now , to claim my vantag doth invit me . 
 hor . of that i shall have also caus to speak , 
 and from hi mouth whose voic will draw on more . 
 but let thi same be present perform 'd , 
 even while men 's mind are wild , lest more mischanc 
 on plot and error happen . 
 fort . let four captain 
 bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage ; 
 for he wa like , had he been put on , 
 to have prov 'd most royal ; and for hi passag 
 the soldier ' music and the rite of war 
 speak loudli for him . 
 take up the bodi . such a sight as thi 
 becom the field but here show much amiss . 
 go , bid the soldier shoot . 
 exeunt march ; after the which a peal of ordnanc 
 are shot off . 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the first part of king henri the fourth 
 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 choru . 
 
 escalu , princ of verona . 
 pari , a young count , kinsman to the princ . 
 montagu , head of two hous at varianc with each other . 
 capulet , head of two hous at varianc with each other . 
 an old man , of the capulet famili . 
 romeo , son to montagu . 
 tybalt , nephew to ladi capulet . 
 mercutio , kinsman to the princ and friend to romeo . 
 benvolio , nephew to montagu , and friend to romeo 
 tybalt , nephew to ladi capulet . 
 friar laurenc , franciscan . 
 friar john , franciscan . 
 balthasar , servant to romeo . 
 abram , servant to montagu . 
 sampson , servant to capulet . 
 gregori , servant to capulet . 
 peter , servant to juliet 's nurs . 
 an apothecari . 
 three musician . 
 an offic . 
 
 ladi montagu , wife to montagu . 
 ladi capulet , wife to capulet . 
 juliet , daughter to capulet . 
 nurs to juliet . 
 
 citizen of verona ; gentlemen and gentlewomen of both hous ; 
 masker , torchbear , page , guard , watchmen , servant , and 
 attend . 
 
 scene. -- verona ; mantua . 
 
 
 
 the prologu 
 
 enter choru . 
 
 chor . two household , both alik in digniti , 
 in fair verona , where we lay our scene , 
 from ancient grudg break to new mutini , 
 where civil blood make civil hand unclean . 
 from forth the fatal loin of these two foe 
 a pair of star-cross 'd lover take their life ; 
 whose misadventur 'd piteou overthrow 
 doth with their death buri their parent ' strife . 
 the fear passag of their death-mark 'd love , 
 and the continu of their parent ' rage , 
 which , but their children 's end , naught could remov , 
 is now the two hour ' traffic of our stage ; 
 the which if you with patient ear attend , 
 what here shall miss , our toil shall strive to mend . 
 [ exit . ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 verona . a public place . 
 
 enter sampson and gregori ( with sword and buckler ) of the hous of capulet . 
 
 samp . gregori , on my word , we 'll not carri coal . 
 greg . no , for then we should be collier . 
 samp . i mean , an we be in choler , we 'll draw . 
 greg . ay , while you live , draw your neck out of collar . 
 samp . i strike quickli , be move . 
 greg . but thou art not quickli move to strike . 
 samp . a dog of the hous of montagu move me . 
 greg . to move is to stir , and to be valiant is to stand . 
 therefor , if thou art move , thou runn'st away . 
 samp . a dog of that hous shall move me to stand . i will take the 
 wall of ani man or maid of montagu 's . 
 greg . that show thee a weak slave ; for the weakest goe to the 
 wall . 
 samp . 't is true ; and therefor women , be the weaker vessel , are 
 ever thrust to the wall . therefor i will push montagu 's men 
 from the wall and thrust hi maid to the wall . 
 greg . the quarrel is between our master and us their men . 
 samp . 't is all one . i will show myself a tyrant . when i have fought 
 with the men , i will be cruel with the maids- i will cut off 
 their head . 
 greg . the head of the maid ? 
 samp . ay , the head of the maid , or their maidenhead . 
 take it in what sens thou wilt . 
 greg . they must take it in sens that feel it . 
 samp . me they shall feel while i am abl to stand ; and 't is known i 
 am a pretti piec of flesh . 
 greg . 't is well thou art not fish ; if thou hadst , thou hadst been 
 poor-john . draw thi tool ! here come two of the hous of 
 montagu . 
 
 enter two other servingmen [ abram and balthasar ] . 
 
 samp . my nake weapon is out . quarrel ! i will back thee . 
 greg . how ? turn thi back and run ? 
 samp . fear me not . 
 greg . no , marri . i fear thee ! 
 samp . let us take the law of our side ; let them begin . 
 greg . i will frown as i pass by , and let them take it as they list . 
 samp . nay , as they dare . i will bite my thumb at them ; which is 
 disgrac to them , if they bear it . 
 abr . do you bite your thumb at us , sir ? 
 samp . i do bite my thumb , sir . 
 abr . do you bite your thumb at us , sir ? 
 samp . [ asid to gregori ] is the law of our side if i say ay ? 
 greg . [ asid to sampson ] no . 
 samp . no , sir , i do not bite my thumb at you , sir ; but i bite my 
 thumb , sir . 
 greg . do you quarrel , sir ? 
 abr . quarrel , sir ? no , sir . 
 samp . but if you do , sir , am for you . i serv as good a man as you . 
 abr . no better . 
 samp . well , sir . 
 
 enter benvolio . 
 
 greg . [ asid to sampson ] say 'better . ' here come one of my 
 master 's kinsmen . 
 samp . ye , better , sir . 
 abr . you lie . 
 samp . draw , if you be men . gregori , rememb thi swash blow . 
 they fight . 
 ben . part , fool ! [ beat down their sword . ] 
 put up your sword . you know not what you do . 
 
 enter tybalt . 
 
 tyb . what , art thou drawn among these heartless hind ? 
 turn thee benvolio ! look upon thi death . 
 ben . i do but keep the peac . put up thi sword , 
 or manag it to part these men with me . 
 tyb . what , drawn , and talk of peac ? i hate the word 
 as i hate hell , all montagu , and thee . 
 have at thee , coward ! they fight . 
 
 enter an offic , and three or four citizen with club or 
 partisan . 
 
 offic . club , bill , and partisan ! strike ! beat them down ! 
 citizen . down with the capulet ! down with the montagu ! 
 
 enter old capulet in hi gown , and hi wife . 
 
 cap . what nois is thi ? give me my long sword , ho ! 
 wife . a crutch , a crutch ! whi call you for a sword ? 
 cap . my sword , i say ! old montagu is come 
 and flourish hi blade in spite of me . 
 
 enter old montagu and hi wife . 
 
 mon . thou villain capulet ! - hold me not , let me go . 
 m. wife . thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe . 
 
 enter princ escalu , with hi train . 
 
 princ . rebelli subject , enemi to peac , 
 profan of thi neighbour-stain steel- 
 will they not hear ? what , ho ! you men , you beast , 
 that quench the fire of your pernici rage 
 with purpl fountain issu from your vein ! 
 on pain of tortur , from those bloodi hand 
 throw your mistemp weapon to the ground 
 and hear the sentenc of your move princ . 
 three civil brawl , bred of an airi word 
 by thee , old capulet , and montagu , 
 have thrice disturb 'd the quiet of our street 
 and made verona 's ancient citizen 
 cast by their grave beseem ornament 
 to wield old partisan , in hand as old , 
 cank'r with peac , to part your cank'r hate . 
 if ever you disturb our street again , 
 your live shall pay the forfeit of the peac . 
 for thi time all the rest depart away . 
 you , capulet , shall go along with me ; 
 and , montagu , come you thi afternoon , 
 to know our farther pleasur in thi case , 
 to old freetown , our common judgment place . 
 onc more , on pain of death , all men depart . 
 exeunt [ all but montagu , hi wife , and benvolio ] . 
 mon . who set thi ancient quarrel new abroach ? 
 speak , nephew , were you by when it began ? 
 ben . here were the servant of your adversari 
 and your , close fight ere i did approach . 
 i drew to part them . in the instant came 
 the fieri tybalt , with hi sword prepar 'd ; 
 which , as he breath 'd defianc to my ear , 
 he swung about hi head and cut the wind , 
 who , noth hurt withal , hiss 'd him in scorn . 
 while we were interchang thrust and blow , 
 came more and more , and fought on part and part , 
 till the princ came , who part either part . 
 m. wife . o , where is romeo ? saw you him to-day ? 
 right glad i am he wa not at thi fray . 
 ben . madam , an hour befor the worshipp 'd sun 
 peer 'd forth the golden window of the east , 
 a troubl mind drave me to walk abroad ; 
 where , underneath the grove of sycamor 
 that westward rooteth from the citi 's side , 
 so earli walk did i see your son . 
 toward him i made ; but he wa ware of me 
 and stole into the covert of the wood . 
 i- measur hi affect by my own , 
 which then most sought where most might not be found , 
 be one too mani by my weari self- 
 pursu 'd my humour , not pursu hi , 
 and gladli shunn 'd who gladli fled from me . 
 mon . mani a morn hath he there been seen , 
 with tear augment the fresh morn 's dew , 
 ad to cloud more cloud with hi deep sigh ; 
 but all so soon as the all-cheer sun 
 should in the farthest east bean to draw 
 the shadi curtain from aurora 's bed , 
 away from light steal home my heavi son 
 and privat in hi chamber pen himself , 
 shut up hi window , lock fair daylight 
 and make himself an artifici night . 
 black and portent must thi humour prove 
 unless good counsel may the caus remov . 
 ben . my nobl uncl , do you know the caus ? 
 mon . i neither know it nor can learn of him 
 ben . have you importun 'd him by ani mean ? 
 mon . both by myself and mani other friend ; 
 but he , hi own affect ' counsellor , 
 is to himself- i will not say how true- 
 but to himself so secret and so close , 
 so far from sound and discoveri , 
 as is the bud bit with an enviou worm 
 ere he can spread hi sweet leav to the air 
 or dedic hi beauti to the sun . 
 could we but learn from whenc hi sorrow grow , 
 we would as willingli give cure as know . 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 ben . see , where he come . so pleas you step asid , 
 i 'll know hi grievanc , or be much deni . 
 mon . i would thou wert so happi by thi stay 
 to hear true shrift . come , madam , let 's away , 
 exeunt [ montagu and wife ] . 
 ben . good morrow , cousin . 
 rom . is the day so young ? 
 ben . but new struck nine . 
 rom . ay me ! sad hour seem long . 
 wa that my father that went henc so fast ? 
 ben . it wa . what sad lengthen romeo 's hour ? 
 rom . not have that which have make them short . 
 ben . in love ? 
 rom . out- 
 ben . of love ? 
 rom . out of her favour where i am in love . 
 ben . ala that love , so gentl in hi view , 
 should be so tyrann and rough in proof ! 
 rom . ala that love , whose view is muffl still , 
 should without eye see pathway to hi will ! 
 where shall we dine ? o me ! what fray wa here ? 
 yet tell me not , for i have heard it all . 
 here 's much to do with hate , but more with love . 
 whi then , o brawl love ! o love hate ! 
 o anyth , of noth first creat ! 
 o heavi light ! seriou vaniti ! 
 misshapen chao of well-seem form ! 
 feather of lead , bright smoke , cold fire , sick health ! 
 still-wak sleep , that is not what it is 
 thi love feel i , that feel no love in thi . 
 dost thou not laugh ? 
 ben . no , coz , i rather weep . 
 rom . good heart , at what ? 
 ben . at thi good heart 's oppress . 
 rom . whi , such is love 's transgress . 
 grief of mine own lie heavi in my breast , 
 which thou wilt propag , to have it prest 
 with more of thine . thi love that thou hast shown 
 doth add more grief to too much of mine own . 
 love is a smoke rai 'd with the fume of sigh ; 
 be purg 'd , a fire sparkl in lover ' eye ; 
 be vex 'd , a sea nourish 'd with lover ' tear . 
 what is it els ? a mad most discreet , 
 a choke gall , and a preserv sweet . 
 farewel , my coz . 
 ben . soft ! i will go along . 
 an if you leav me so , you do me wrong . 
 rom . tut ! i have lost myself ; i am not here : 
 thi is not romeo , he 's some other where . 
 ben . tell me in sad , who is that you love ? 
 rom . what , shall i groan and tell thee ? 
 ben . groan ? whi , no ; 
 but sadli tell me who . 
 rom . bid a sick man in sad make hi will . 
 ah , word ill urg 'd to one that is so ill ! 
 in sad , cousin , i do love a woman . 
 ben . i aim 'd so near when i suppo 'd you lov 'd . 
 rom . a right good markman ! and she 's fair i love . 
 ben . a right fair mark , fair coz , is soonest hit . 
 rom . well , in that hit you miss . she 'll not be hit 
 with cupid 's arrow . she hath dian 's wit , 
 and , in strong proof of chastiti well arm 'd , 
 from love 's weak childish bow she live unharm 'd . 
 she will not stay the sieg of love term , 
 nor bide th ' encount of assail eye , 
 nor ope her lap to saint-seduc gold . 
 o , she 's rich in beauti ; onli poor 
 that , when she die , with beauti die her store . 
 ben . then she hath sworn that she will still live chast ? 
 rom . she hath , and in that spare make huge wast ; 
 for beauti , starv 'd with her sever , 
 cut beauti off from all poster . 
 she is too fair , too wise , wise too fair , 
 to merit bliss by make me despair . 
 she hath forsworn to love , and in that vow 
 do i live dead that live to tell it now . 
 ben . be rul 'd by me : forget to think of her . 
 rom . o , teach me how i should forget to think ! 
 ben . by give liberti unto thine eye . 
 examin other beauti . 
 rom . 't is the way 
 to call her ( exquisit ) in question more . 
 these happi mask that kiss fair ladi ' brow , 
 be black put us in mind they hide the fair . 
 he that is strucken blind can not forget 
 the preciou treasur of hi eyesight lost . 
 show me a mistress that is pass fair , 
 what doth her beauti serv but as a note 
 where i may read who pass 'd that pass fair ? 
 farewel . thou canst not teach me to forget . 
 ben . i 'll pay that doctrin , or els die in debt . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a street . 
 
 enter capulet , counti pari , and [ servant ] -the clown . 
 
 cap . but montagu is bound as well as i , 
 in penalti alik ; and 't is not hard , i think , 
 for men so old as we to keep the peac . 
 par . of honour reckon are you both , 
 and piti 't is you liv 'd at odd so long . 
 but now , my lord , what say you to my suit ? 
 cap . but say o'er what i have said befor : 
 my child is yet a stranger in the world , 
 she hath not seen the chang of fourteen year ; 
 let two more summer wither in their pride 
 ere we may think her ripe to be a bride . 
 par . younger than she are happi mother made . 
 cap . and too soon marr 'd are those so earli made . 
 the earth hath swallow all my hope but she ; 
 she is the hope ladi of my earth . 
 but woo her , gentl pari , get her heart ; 
 my will to her consent is but a part . 
 an she agre , within her scope of choic 
 lie my consent and fair accord voic . 
 thi night i hold an old accustom 'd feast , 
 whereto i have invit mani a guest , 
 such as i love ; and you among the store , 
 one more , most welcom , make my number more . 
 at my poor hous look to behold thi night 
 earth-tread star that make dark heaven light . 
 such comfort as do lusti young men feel 
 when well apparel 'd april on the heel 
 of limp winter tread , even such delight 
 among fresh femal bud shall you thi night 
 inherit at my hous . hear all , all see , 
 and like her most whose merit most shall be ; 
 which , on more view of mani , mine , be one , 
 may stand in number , though in reck'n none . 
 come , go with me . [ to servant , give him a paper ] go , sirrah , 
 trudg about 
 through fair verona ; find those person out 
 whose name are written there , and to them say , 
 my hous and welcom on their pleasur stay- 
 exeunt [ capulet and pari ] . 
 serv . find them out whose name are written here ? it is written 
 that the shoemak should meddl with hi yard and the tailor 
 with hi last , the fisher with hi pencil and the painter with 
 hi net ; but i am sent to find those person whose name are 
 here writ , and can never find what name the write person hath 
 here writ . i must to the learn . in good time ! 
 
 enter benvolio and romeo . 
 
 ben . tut , man , one fire burn out anoth 's burn ; 
 one pain is lesson by anoth 's anguish ; 
 turn giddi , and be holp by backward turn ; 
 one desper grief cure with anoth 's languish . 
 take thou some new infect to thi eye , 
 and the rank poison of the old will die . 
 rom . your plantain leaf is excel for that . 
 ben . for what , i pray thee ? 
 rom . for your broken shin . 
 ben . whi , romeo , art thou mad ? 
 rom . not mad , but bound more than a madman is ; 
 shut up in prison , kept without my food , 
 whipp 'd and torment and- god-den , good fellow . 
 serv . god gi ' go-den . i pray , sir , can you read ? 
 rom . ay , mine own fortun in my miseri . 
 serv . perhap you have learn it without book . but i pray , can you 
 read anyth you see ? 
 rom . ay , if i know the letter and the languag . 
 serv . ye say honestli . rest you merri ! 
 rom . stay , fellow ; i can read . he read . 
 
 'signior martino and hi wife and daughter ; 
 counti anselmo and hi beauteou sister ; 
 the ladi widow of vitruvio ; 
 signior placentio and hi love niec ; 
 mercutio and hi brother valentin ; 
 mine uncl capulet , hi wife , and daughter ; 
 my fair niec rosalin and livia ; 
 signior valentio and hi cousin tybalt ; 
 lucio and the live helena . ' 
 
 [ give back the paper . ] a fair assembl . whither should they come ? 
 serv . up . 
 rom . whither ? 
 serv . to supper , to our hous . 
 rom . whose hous ? 
 serv . my master 's . 
 rom . inde i should have ask 'd you that befor . 
 serv . now i 'll tell you without ask . my master is the great rich 
 capulet ; and if you be not of the hous of montagu , i pray come 
 and crush a cup of wine . rest you merri ! exit . 
 ben . at thi same ancient feast of capulet 's 
 sup the fair rosalin whom thou so lov'st ; 
 with all the admir beauti of verona . 
 go thither , and with unattaint eye 
 compar her face with some that i shall show , 
 and i will make thee think thi swan a crow . 
 rom . when the devout religion of mine eye 
 maintain such falsehood , then turn tear to fire ; 
 and these , who , often drown 'd , could never die , 
 transpar heret , be burnt for liar ! 
 one fairer than my love ? the all-se sun 
 ne'er saw her match sinc first the world begun . 
 ben . tut ! you saw her fair , none els be by , 
 herself poi 'd with herself in either eye ; 
 but in that crystal scale let there be weigh 'd 
 your ladi 's love against some other maid 
 that i will show you shine at thi feast , 
 and she shall scant show well that now seem best . 
 rom . i 'll go along , no such sight to be shown , 
 but to rejoic in splendour of my own . [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 capulet 's hous . 
 
 enter capulet 's wife , and nurs . 
 
 wife . nurs , where 's my daughter ? call her forth to me . 
 nurs . now , by my maidenhead at twelv year old , 
 i bade her come . what , lamb ! what ladybird ! 
 god forbid ! where 's thi girl ? what , juliet ! 
 
 enter juliet . 
 
 jul . how now ? who call ? 
 nurs . your mother . 
 jul . madam , i am here . 
 what is your will ? 
 wife . thi is the matter- nurs , give leav awhil , 
 we must talk in secret . nurs , come back again ; 
 i have rememb'r me , thou 's hear our counsel . 
 thou knowest my daughter 's of a pretti age . 
 nurs . faith , i can tell her age unto an hour . 
 wife . she 's not fourteen . 
 nurs . i 'll lay fourteen of my teeth- 
 and yet , to my teen be it spoken , i have but four- 
 she is not fourteen . how long is it now 
 to lammastid ? 
 wife . a fortnight and odd day . 
 nurs . even or odd , of all day in the year , 
 come lamma eve at night shall she be fourteen . 
 susan and she ( god rest all christian soul ! ) 
 were of an age . well , susan is with god ; 
 she wa too good for me . but , as i said , 
 on lamma eve at night shall she be fourteen ; 
 that shall she , marri ; i rememb it well . 
 't is sinc the earthquak now eleven year ; 
 and she wa wean 'd ( i never shall forget it ) , 
 of all the day of the year , upon that day ; 
 for i had then laid wormwood to my dug , 
 sit in the sun under the dovehous wall . 
 my lord and you were then at mantua . 
 nay , i do bear a brain . but , as i said , 
 when it did tast the wormwood on the nippl 
 of my dug and felt it bitter , pretti fool , 
 to see it tetchi and fall out with the dug ! 
 shake , quoth the dovehous ! 't wa no need , i trow , 
 to bid me trudg . 
 and sinc that time it is eleven year , 
 for then she could stand high-lon ; nay , by th ' rood , 
 she could have run and waddl all about ; 
 for even the day befor , she broke her brow ; 
 and then my husband ( god be with hi soul ! 
 ' a wa a merri man ) took up the child . 
 'yea , ' quoth he , 'dost thou fall upon thi face ? 
 thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit ; 
 wilt thou not , jule ? ' and , by my holidam , 
 the pretti wretch left cri , and said 'ay . ' 
 to see now how a jest shall come about ! 
 i warrant , an i should live a thousand yea , 
 i never should forget it . 'wilt thou not , jule ? ' quoth he , 
 and , pretti fool , it stint , and said 'ay . ' 
 wife . enough of thi . i pray thee hold thi peac . 
 nurs . ye , madam . yet i can not choos but laugh 
 to think it should leav cri and say 'ay . ' 
 and yet , i warrant , it bad upon it brow 
 a bump as big as a young cock'rel 's stone ; 
 a peril knock ; and it cri bitterli . 
 'yea , ' quoth my husband , 'fall'st upon thi face ? 
 thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age ; 
 wilt thou not , jule ? ' it stint , and said 'ay . ' 
 jul . and stint thou too , i pray thee , nurs , say i . 
 nurs . peac , i have done . god mark thee to hi grace ! 
 thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er i nur 'd . 
 an i might live to see thee marri onc , i have my wish . 
 wife . marri , that 'marri ' is the veri theme 
 i came to talk of . tell me , daughter juliet , 
 how stand your disposit to be marri ? 
 jul . it is an honour that i dream not of . 
 nurs . an honour ? were not i thine onli nurs , 
 i would say thou hadst suck 'd wisdom from thi teat . 
 wife . well , think of marriag now . younger than you , 
 here in verona , ladi of esteem , 
 are made alreadi mother . by my count , 
 i wa your mother much upon these year 
 that you are now a maid . thu then in brief : 
 the valiant pari seek you for hi love . 
 nurs . a man , young ladi ! ladi , such a man 
 as all the world- whi he 's a man of wax . 
 wife . verona 's summer hath not such a flower . 
 nurs . nay , he 's a flower , in faith- a veri flower . 
 wife . what say you ? can you love the gentleman ? 
 thi night you shall behold him at our feast . 
 read o'er the volum of young pari ' face , 
 and find delight writ there with beauti 's pen ; 
 examin everi marri lineament , 
 and see how one anoth lend content ; 
 and what obscur 'd in thi fair volum lie 
 find written in the margent of hi eye , 
 thi preciou book of love , thi unbound lover , 
 to beautifi him onli lack a cover . 
 the fish live in the sea , and 't is much pride 
 for fair without the fair within to hide . 
 that book in mani 's eye doth share the glori , 
 that in gold clasp lock in the golden stori ; 
 so shall you share all that he doth possess , 
 by have him make yourself no less . 
 nurs . no less ? nay , bigger ! women grow by men 
 wife . speak briefli , can you like of pari ' love ? 
 jul . i 'll look to like , if look like move ; 
 but no more deep will i endart mine eye 
 than your consent give strength to make it fli . 
 
 enter servingman . 
 
 serv . madam , the guest are come , supper serv 'd up , you call 'd , my 
 young ladi ask 'd for , the nurs cur 'd in the pantri , and 
 everyth in extrem . i must henc to wait . i beseech you 
 follow straight . 
 wife . we follow thee . exit [ servingman ] . 
 juliet , the counti stay . 
 nurs . go , girl , seek happi night to happi day . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 a street . 
 
 enter romeo , mercutio , benvolio , with five or six other masker ; torchbear . 
 
 rom . what , shall thi speech be spoke for our excus ? 
 or shall we on without apolog ? 
 ben . the date is out of such prolix . 
 we 'll have no cupid hoodwink 'd with a scarf , 
 bear a tartar 's paint bow of lath , 
 scare the ladi like a crowkeep ; 
 nor no without-book prologu , faintli spoke 
 after the prompter , for our entranc ; 
 but , let them measur us by what they will , 
 we 'll measur them a measur , and be gone . 
 rom . give me a torch . i am not for thi ambl . 
 be but heavi , i will bear the light . 
 mer . nay , gentl romeo , we must have you danc . 
 rom . not i , believ me . you have danc shoe 
 with nimbl sole ; i have a soul of lead 
 so stake me to the ground i can not move . 
 mer . you are a lover . borrow cupid 's wing 
 and soar with them abov a common bound . 
 rom . i am too sore enpierc with hi shaft 
 to soar with hi light feather ; and so bound 
 i can not bound a pitch abov dull woe . 
 under love 's heavi burthen do i sink . 
 mer . and , to sink in it , should you burthen love- 
 too great oppress for a tender thing . 
 rom . is love a tender thing ? it is too rough , 
 too rude , too boist'rou , and it prick like thorn . 
 mer . if love be rough with you , be rough with love . 
 prick love for prick , and you beat love down . 
 give me a case to put my visag in . 
 a visor for a visor ! what care i 
 what curiou eye doth quot deform ? 
 here are the beetl brow shall blush for me . 
 ben . come , knock and enter ; and no sooner in 
 but everi man betak him to hi leg . 
 rom . a torch for me ! let wanton light of heart 
 tickl the senseless rush with their heel ; 
 for i am proverb 'd with a grandsir phrase , 
 i 'll be a candle-hold and look on ; 
 the game wa ne'er so fair , and i am done . 
 mer . tut ! dun 's the mous , the constabl 's own word ! 
 if thou art dun , we 'll draw thee from the mire 
 of thi sir-rever love , wherein thou stick'st 
 up to the ear . come , we burn daylight , ho ! 
 rom . nay , that 's not so . 
 mer . i mean , sir , in delay 
 we wast our light in vain , like lamp by day . 
 take our good mean , for our judgment sit 
 five time in that ere onc in our five wit . 
 rom . and we mean well , in go to thi masqu ; 
 but 't is no wit to go . 
 mer . whi , may one ask ? 
 rom . i dreamt a dream to-night . 
 mer . and so did i . 
 rom . well , what wa your ? 
 mer . that dreamer often lie . 
 rom . in bed asleep , while they do dream thing true . 
 mer . o , then i see queen mab hath been with you . 
 she is the fairi ' midwif , and she come 
 in shape no bigger than an agat stone 
 on the forefing of an alderman , 
 drawn with a team of littl atomi 
 athwart men 's nose as they lie asleep ; 
 her wagon spoke made of long spinner ' leg , 
 the cover , of the wing of grasshopp ; 
 her trace , of the smallest spider 's web ; 
 her collar , of the moonshin 's wat'ri beam ; 
 her whip , of cricket 's bone ; the lash , of film ; 
 her wagon , a small grey-coat gnat , 
 not half so big as a round littl worm 
 prick 'd from the lazi finger of a maid ; 
 her chariot is an empti hazelnut , 
 made by the joiner squirrel or old grub , 
 time out o ' mind the fairi ' coachmak . 
 and in thi state she 'gallop night by night 
 through lover ' brain , and then they dream of love ; 
 o'er courtier ' knee , that dream on cursi straight ; 
 o'er lawyer ' finger , who straight dream on fee ; 
 o'er ladi ' lip , who straight on kiss dream , 
 which oft the angri mab with blister plagu , 
 becaus their breath with sweetmeat taint are . 
 sometim she gallop o'er a courtier 's nose , 
 and then dream he of smell out a suit ; 
 and sometim come she with a tithe-pig 's tail 
 tickl a parson 's nose as ' a lie asleep , 
 then dream he of anoth benefic . 
 sometim she driveth o'er a soldier 's neck , 
 and then dream he of cut foreign throat , 
 of breach , ambuscado , spanish blade , 
 of health five fadom deep ; and then anon 
 drum in hi ear , at which he start and wake , 
 and be thu fright , swear a prayer or two 
 and sleep again . thi is that veri mab 
 that plat the mane of hors in the night 
 and bake the elflock in foul sluttish , hair , 
 which onc untangl much misfortun bode 
 thi is the hag , when maid lie on their back , 
 that press them and learn them first to bear , 
 make them women of good carriag . 
 thi is she- 
 rom . peac , peac , mercutio , peac ! 
 thou talk'st of noth . 
 mer . true , i talk of dream ; 
 which are the children of an idl brain , 
 begot of noth but vain fantasi ; 
 which is as thin of substanc as the air , 
 and more inconst than the wind , who wooe 
 even now the frozen bosom of the north 
 and , be anger 'd , puff away from thenc , 
 turn hi face to the dew-drop south . 
 ben . thi wind you talk of blow us from ourselv . 
 supper is done , and we shall come too late . 
 rom . i fear , too earli ; for my mind misgiv 
 some consequ , yet hang in the star , 
 shall bitterli begin hi fear date 
 with thi night 's revel and expir the term 
 of a despis life , clo 'd in my breast , 
 by some vile forfeit of untim death . 
 but he that hath the steerag of my cours 
 direct my sail ! on , lusti gentlemen ! 
 ben . strike , drum . 
 they march about the stage . [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 capulet 's hous . 
 
 servingmen come forth with napkin . 
 
 < num > . serv . where 's potpan , that he help not to take away ? 
 he shift a trencher ! he scrape a trencher ! 
 < num > . serv . when good manner shall lie all in one or two men 's hand , 
 and they unwash 'd too , 't is a foul thing . 
 < num > . serv . away with the join-stool , remov the court-cubbert , look 
 to the plate . good thou , save me a piec of marchpan and , as 
 thou love me , let the porter let in susan grindston and nell . 
 anthoni , and potpan ! 
 < num > . serv . ay , boy , readi . 
 < num > . serv . you are look 'd for and call 'd for , ask 'd for and sought 
 for , in the great chamber . 
 < num > . serv . we can not be here and there too . cheerli , boy ! 
 be brisk awhil , and the longer liver take all . exeunt . 
 
 enter the masker , enter , [ with servant , ] capulet , hi wife , 
 juliet , tybalt , and all the guest 
 and gentlewomen to the masker . 
 
 cap . welcom , gentlemen ! ladi that have their toe 
 unplagu 'd with corn will have a bout with you . 
 ah ha , my mistress ! which of you all 
 will now deni to danc ? she that make dainti , 
 she i 'll swear hath corn . am i come near ye now ? 
 welcom , gentlemen ! i have seen the day 
 that i have worn a visor and could tell 
 a whisper tale in a fair ladi 's ear , 
 such as would pleas . 't is gone , 't is gone , 't is gone ! 
 you are welcom , gentlemen ! come , musician , play . 
 a hall , a hall ! give room ! and foot it , girl . 
 music play , and they danc . 
 more light , you knave ! and turn the tabl up , 
 and quench the fire , the room is grown too hot . 
 ah , sirrah , thi unlook'd-for sport come well . 
 nay , sit , nay , sit , good cousin capulet , 
 for you and i are past our danc day . 
 how long is't now sinc last yourself and i 
 were in a mask ? 
 < num > . cap . by ' r ladi , thirti year . 
 cap . what , man ? 't is not so much , 't is not so much ! 
 't is sinc the nuptial of lucentio , 
 come pentecost as quickli as it will , 
 some five-and-twenti year , and then we mask 'd . 
 < num > . cap . 't is more , 't is more ! hi son is elder , sir ; 
 hi son is thirti . 
 cap . will you tell me that ? 
 hi son wa but a ward two year ago . 
 rom . [ to a servingman ] what ladi 's that , which doth enrich the hand 
 of yonder knight ? 
 serv . i know not , sir . 
 rom . o , she doth teach the torch to burn bright ! 
 it seem she hang upon the cheek of night 
 like a rich jewel in an ethiop 's ear- 
 beauti too rich for use , for earth too dear ! 
 so show a snowi dove troop with crow 
 as yonder ladi o'er her fellow show . 
 the measur done , i 'll watch her place of stand 
 and , touch her , make bless my rude hand . 
 did my heart love till now ? forswear it , sight ! 
 for i ne'er saw true beauti till thi night . 
 tyb . thi , by hi voic , should be a montagu . 
 fetch me my rapier , boy . what , dare the slave 
 come hither , cover 'd with an antic face , 
 to fleer and scorn at our solemn ? 
 now , by the stock and honour of my kin , 
 to strike him dead i hold it not a sin . 
 cap . whi , how now , kinsman ? wherefor storm you so ? 
 tyb . uncl , thi is a montagu , our foe ; 
 a villain , that is hither come in spite 
 to scorn at our solemn thi night . 
 cap . young romeo is it ? 
 tyb . 't is he , that villain romeo . 
 cap . content thee , gentl coz , let him alon . 
 ' a bear him like a portli gentleman , 
 and , to say truth , verona brag of him 
 to be a virtuou and well-govern 'd youth . 
 i would not for the wealth of all thi town 
 here in my hous do him disparag . 
 therefor be patient , take no note of him . 
 it is my will ; the which if thou respect , 
 show a fair presenc and put off these frown , 
 an ill-beseem semblanc for a feast . 
 tyb . it fit when such a villain is a guest . 
 i 'll not endur him . 
 cap . he shall be endur 'd . 
 what , goodman boy ? i say he shall . go to ! 
 am i the master here , or you ? go to ! 
 you 'll not endur him ? god shall mend my soul ! 
 you 'll make a mutini among my guest ! 
 you will set cock-a-hoop ! you 'll be the man ! 
 tyb . whi , uncl , 't is a shame . 
 cap . go to , go to ! 
 you are a sauci boy . is't so , inde ? 
 thi trick may chanc to scath you . i know what . 
 you must contrari me ! marri , 't is time.- 
 well said , my heart ! - you are a princox- go ! 
 be quiet , or- more light , more light ! - for shame ! 
 i 'll make you quiet ; what ! - cheerli , my heart ! 
 tyb . patienc perforc with wil choler meet 
 make my flesh trembl in their differ greet . 
 i will withdraw ; but thi intrus shall , 
 now seem sweet , convert to bitt'rest gall . exit . 
 rom . if i profan with my unworthiest hand 
 thi holi shrine , the gentl fine is thi : 
 my lip , two blush pilgrim , readi stand 
 to smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss . 
 jul . good pilgrim , you do wrong your hand too much , 
 which mannerli devot show in thi ; 
 for saint have hand that pilgrim ' hand do touch , 
 and palm to palm is holi palmer ' kiss . 
 rom . have not saint lip , and holi palmer too ? 
 jul . ay , pilgrim , lip that they must use in pray ' r . 
 rom . o , then , dear saint , let lip do what hand do ! 
 they pray ; grant thou , lest faith turn to despair . 
 jul . saint do not move , though grant for prayer ' sake . 
 rom . then move not while my prayer 's effect i take . 
 thu from my lip , by thine my sin is purg 'd . [ kiss her . ] 
 jul . then have my lip the sin that they have took . 
 rom . sin from my lip ? o trespass sweetli urg 'd ! 
 give me my sin again . [ kiss her . ] 
 jul . you kiss by th ' book . 
 nurs . madam , your mother crave a word with you . 
 rom . what is her mother ? 
 nurs . marri , bachelor , 
 her mother is the ladi of the hous . 
 and a good ladi , and a wise and virtuou . 
 i nur 'd her daughter that you talk 'd withal . 
 i tell you , he that can lay hold of her 
 shall have the chink . 
 rom . is she a capulet ? 
 o dear account ! my life is my foe 's debt . 
 ben . away , be gone ; the sport is at the best . 
 rom . ay , so i fear ; the more is my unrest . 
 cap . nay , gentlemen , prepar not to be gone ; 
 we have a trifl foolish banquet toward . 
 is it e'en so ? whi then , i thank you all . 
 i thank you , honest gentlemen . good night . 
 more torch here ! [ exeunt masker . ] come on then , let 's to bed . 
 ah , sirrah , by my fay , it wax late ; 
 i 'll to my rest . 
 exeunt [ all but juliet and nurs ] . 
 jul . come hither , nurs . what is yond gentleman ? 
 nurs . the son and heir of old tiberio . 
 jul . what 's he that now is go out of door ? 
 nurs . marri , that , i think , be young petruchio . 
 jul . what 's he that follow there , that would not danc ? 
 nurs . i know not . 
 jul . go ask hi name.- if he be marri , 
 my grave is like to be my wed bed . 
 nurs . hi name is romeo , and a montagu , 
 the onli son of your great enemi . 
 jul . my onli love , sprung from my onli hate ! 
 too earli seen unknown , and known too late ! 
 prodigi birth of love it is to me 
 that i must love a loath enemi . 
 nurs . what 's thi ? what 's thi ? 
 jul . a rhyme i learnt even now 
 of one i danc 'd withal . 
 one call within , 'juliet . ' 
 nurs . anon , anon ! 
 come , let 's away ; the stranger all are gone . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 prologu 
 
 enter choru . 
 
 chor . now old desir doth in hi deathb lie , 
 and young affect gape to be hi heir ; 
 that fair for which love groan 'd for and would die , 
 with tender juliet match 'd , is now not fair . 
 now romeo is belov 'd , and love again , 
 alik bewitch by the charm of look ; 
 but to hi foe suppo 'd he must complain , 
 and she steal love 's sweet bait from fear hook . 
 be held a foe , he may not have access 
 to breath such vow as lover use to swear , 
 and she as much in love , her mean much less 
 to meet her new belov anywher ; 
 but passion lend them power , time mean , to meet , 
 temp'r extrem with extrem sweet . 
 exit . 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 a lane by the wall of capulet 's orchard . 
 
 enter romeo alon . 
 
 rom . can i go forward when my heart is here ? 
 turn back , dull earth , and find thi centr out . 
 [ climb the wall and leap down within it . ] 
 
 enter benvolio with mercutio . 
 
 ben . romeo ! my cousin romeo ! romeo ! 
 mer . he is wise , 
 and , on my life , hath stol'n him home to bed . 
 ben . he ran thi way , and leapt thi orchard wall . 
 call , good mercutio . 
 mer . nay , i 'll conjur too . 
 romeo ! humour ! madman ! passion ! lover ! 
 appear thou in the like of a sigh ; 
 speak but one rhyme , and i am satisfi ! 
 cri but 'ay me ! ' pronounc but 'love ' and 'dove ' ; 
 speak to my gossip venu one fair word , 
 one nicknam for her purblind son and heir , 
 young adam cupid , he that shot so trim 
 when king cophetua lov 'd the beggar maid ! 
 he heareth not , he stirreth not , be moveth not ; 
 the ape is dead , and i must conjur him . 
 i conjur thee by rosalin 's bright eye . 
 by her high forehead and her scarlet lip , 
 by her fine foot , straight leg , and quiver thigh , 
 and the demesn that there adjac lie , 
 that in thi like thou appear to us ! 
 ben . an if he hear thee , thou wilt anger him . 
 mer . thi can not anger him . 'twould anger him 
 to rais a spirit in hi mistress ' circl 
 of some strang natur , let it there stand 
 till she had laid it and conjur 'd it down . 
 that were some spite ; my invoc 
 is fair and honest : in hi mistress ' name , 
 i conjur onli but to rais up him . 
 ben . come , he hath hid himself among these tree 
 to be consort with the humor night . 
 blind is hi love and best befit the dark . 
 mer . if love be blind , love can not hit the mark . 
 now will he sit under a medlar tree 
 and wish hi mistress were that kind of fruit 
 as maid call medlar when they laugh alon . 
 o , romeo , that she were , o that she were 
 an open et cetera , thou a pop'rin pear ! 
 romeo , good night . i 'll to my truckle-b ; 
 thi field-b is too cold for me to sleep . 
 come , shall we go ? 
 ben . go then , for 't is in vain 
 'to seek him here that mean not to be found . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 capulet 's orchard . 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 rom . he jest at scar that never felt a wound . 
 
 enter juliet abov at a window . 
 
 but soft ! what light through yonder window break ? 
 it is the east , and juliet is the sun ! 
 aris , fair sun , and kill the enviou moon , 
 who is alreadi sick and pale with grief 
 that thou her maid art far more fair than she . 
 be not her maid , sinc she is enviou . 
 her vestal liveri is but sick and green , 
 and none but fool do wear it . cast it off . 
 it is my ladi ; o , it is my love ! 
 o that she knew she were ! 
 she speak , yet she say noth . what of that ? 
 her eye discours ; i will answer it . 
 i am too bold ; 't is not to me she speak . 
 two of the fairest star in all the heaven , 
 have some busi , do entreat her eye 
 to twinkl in their sphere till they return . 
 what if her eye were there , they in her head ? 
 the bright of her cheek would shame those star 
 as daylight doth a lamp ; her eye in heaven 
 would through the airi region stream so bright 
 that bird would sing and think it were not night . 
 see how she lean her cheek upon her hand ! 
 o that i were a glove upon that hand , 
 that i might touch that cheek ! 
 jul . ay me ! 
 rom . she speak . 
 o , speak again , bright angel ! for thou art 
 as gloriou to thi night , be o'er my head , 
 as is a wing messeng of heaven 
 unto the white-upturn wond'r eye 
 of mortal that fall back to gaze on him 
 when he bestrid the lazy-pac cloud 
 and sail upon the bosom of the air . 
 jul . o romeo , romeo ! wherefor art thou romeo ? 
 deni thi father and refus thi name ! 
 or , if thou wilt not , be but sworn my love , 
 and i 'll no longer be a capulet . 
 rom . [ asid ] shall i hear more , or shall i speak at thi ? 
 jul . 't is but thi name that is my enemi . 
 thou art thyself , though not a montagu . 
 what 's montagu ? it is nor hand , nor foot , 
 nor arm , nor face , nor ani other part 
 belong to a man . o , be some other name ! 
 what 's in a name ? that which we call a rose 
 by ani other name would smell as sweet . 
 so romeo would , were he not romeo call 'd , 
 retain that dear perfect which he owe 
 without that titl . romeo , doff thi name ; 
 and for that name , which is no part of thee , 
 take all myself . 
 rom . i take thee at thi word . 
 call me but love , and i 'll be new baptiz 'd ; 
 henceforth i never will be romeo . 
 jul . what man art thou that , thu bescreen 'd in night , 
 so stumblest on my counsel ? 
 rom . by a name 
 i know not how to tell thee who i am . 
 my name , dear saint , is hate to myself , 
 becaus it is an enemi to thee . 
 had i it written , i would tear the word . 
 jul . my ear have yet not drunk a hundr word 
 of that tongu 's utter , yet i know the sound . 
 art thou not romeo , and a montagu ? 
 rom . neither , fair saint , if either thee dislik . 
 jul . how cam'st thou hither , tell me , and wherefor ? 
 the orchard wall are high and hard to climb , 
 and the place death , consid who thou art , 
 if ani of my kinsmen find thee here . 
 rom . with love 's light wing did i o'erperch these wall ; 
 for stoni limit can not hold love out , 
 and what love can do , that dare love attempt . 
 therefor thi kinsmen are no let to me . 
 jul . if they do see thee , they will murther thee . 
 rom . alack , there lie more peril in thine eye 
 than twenti of their sword ! look thou but sweet , 
 and i am proof against their enmiti . 
 jul . i would not for the world they saw thee here . 
 rom . i have night 's cloak to hide me from their sight ; 
 and but thou love me , let them find me here . 
 my life were better end by their hate 
 than death prorogu , want of thi love . 
 jul . by whose direct found'st thou out thi place ? 
 rom . by love , that first did prompt me to enquir . 
 he lent me counsel , and i lent him eye . 
 i am no pilot ; yet , wert thou as far 
 as that vast shore wash 'd with the farthest sea , 
 i would adventur for such merchandis . 
 jul . thou knowest the mask of night is on my face ; 
 els would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek 
 for that which thou hast heard me speak to-night . 
 fain would i dwell on form- fain , fain deni 
 what i have spoke ; but farewel compliment ! 
 dost thou love me , i know thou wilt say 'ay ' ; 
 and i will take thi word . yet , if thou swear'st , 
 thou mayst prove fals . at lover ' perjuri , 
 they say jove laugh . o gentl romeo , 
 if thou dost love , pronounc it faith . 
 or if thou thinkest i am too quickli won , 
 i 'll frown , and be pervers , and say thee nay , 
 so thou wilt woo ; but els , not for the world . 
 in truth , fair montagu , i am too fond , 
 and therefor thou mayst think my haviour light ; 
 but trust me , gentleman , i 'll prove more true 
 than those that have more cun to be strang . 
 i should have been more strang , i must confess , 
 but that thou overheard'st , ere i wa ware , 
 my true-lov passion . therefor pardon me , 
 and not imput thi yield to light love , 
 which the dark night hath so discov . 
 rom . ladi , by yonder bless moon i swear , 
 that tip with silver all these fruit-tre tops- 
 jul . o , swear not by the moon , th ' inconst moon , 
 that monthli chang in her circl orb , 
 lest that thi love prove likewis variabl . 
 rom . what shall i swear by ? 
 jul . do not swear at all ; 
 or if thou wilt , swear by thi graciou self , 
 which is the god of my idolatri , 
 and i 'll believ thee . 
 rom . if my heart 's dear love- 
 jul . well , do not swear . although i joy in thee , 
 i have no joy of thi contract to-night . 
 it is too rash , too unadvi 'd , too sudden ; 
 too like the lightn , which doth ceas to be 
 ere one can say 'it lighten . ' sweet , good night ! 
 thi bud of love , by summer 's ripen breath , 
 may prove a beauteou flow ' r when next we meet . 
 good night , good night ! as sweet repos and rest 
 come to thi heart as that within my breast ! 
 rom . o , wilt thou leav me so unsatisfi ? 
 jul . what satisfact canst thou have to-night ? 
 rom . th ' exchang of thi love 's faith vow for mine . 
 jul . i gave thee mine befor thou didst request it ; 
 and yet i would it were to give again . 
 rom . would'st thou withdraw it ? for what purpos , love ? 
 jul . but to be frank and give it thee again . 
 and yet i wish but for the thing i have . 
 my bounti is as boundless as the sea , 
 my love as deep ; the more i give to thee , 
 the more i have , for both are infinit . 
 i hear some nois within . dear love , adieu ! 
 [ nurs ] call within . 
 anon , good nurs ! sweet montagu , be true . 
 stay but a littl , i will come again . [ exit . ] 
 rom . o bless , bless night ! i am afeard , 
 be in night , all thi is but a dream , 
 too flattering-sweet to be substanti . 
 
 enter juliet abov . 
 
 jul . three word , dear romeo , and good night inde . 
 if that thi bent of love be honour , 
 thi purpos marriag , send me word to-morrow , 
 by one that i 'll procur to come to thee , 
 where and what time thou wilt perform the rite ; 
 and all my fortun at thi foot i 'll lay 
 and follow thee my lord throughout the world . 
 nurs . ( within ) madam ! 
 jul . i come , anon.- but if thou meanest not well , 
 i do beseech thee- 
 nurs . ( within ) madam ! 
 jul . by-and-bi i come.- 
 to ceas thi suit and leav me to my grief . 
 to-morrow will i send . 
 rom . so thrive my soul- 
 jul . a thousand time good night ! exit . 
 rom . a thousand time the wors , to want thi light ! 
 love goe toward love as schoolboy from their book ; 
 but love from love , toward school with heavi look . 
 
 enter juliet again , [ abov ] . 
 
 jul . hist ! romeo , hist ! o for a falcon 's voic 
 to lure thi tassel-gentl back again ! 
 bondag is hoars and may not speak aloud ; 
 els would i tear the cave where echo lie , 
 and make her airi tongu more hoars than mine 
 with repetit of my romeo 's name . 
 romeo ! 
 rom . it is my soul that call upon my name . 
 how silver-sweet sound lover ' tongu by night , 
 like softest music to attend ear ! 
 jul . romeo ! 
 rom . my dear ? 
 jul . at what o'clock to-morrow 
 shall i send to thee ? 
 rom . by the hour of nine . 
 jul . i will not fail . 't is twenti year till then . 
 i have forgot whi i did call thee back . 
 rom . let me stand here till thou rememb it . 
 jul . i shall forget , to have thee still stand there , 
 rememb'r how i love thi compani . 
 rom . and i 'll still stay , to have thee still forget , 
 forget ani other home but thi . 
 jul . 't is almost morn . i would have thee gone- 
 and yet no farther than a wanton 's bird , 
 that let it hop a littl from her hand , 
 like a poor prison in hi twist gyve , 
 and with a silk thread pluck it back again , 
 so loving-jeal of hi liberti . 
 rom . i would i were thi bird . 
 jul . sweet , so would i . 
 yet i should kill thee with much cherish . 
 good night , good night ! part is such sweet sorrow , 
 that i shall say good night till it be morrow . 
 [ exit . ] 
 rom . sleep dwell upon thine eye , peac in thi breast ! 
 would i were sleep and peac , so sweet to rest ! 
 henc will i to my ghostli father 's cell , 
 hi help to crave and my dear hap to tell . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 friar laurenc 's cell . 
 
 enter friar , [ laurenc ] alon , with a basket . 
 
 friar . the grey-ey 'd morn smile on the frown night , 
 check'r the eastern cloud with streak of light ; 
 and fleck dark like a drunkard reel 
 from forth day 's path and titan 's fieri wheel . 
 non , ere the sun advanc hi burn eye 
 the day to cheer and night 's dank dew to dri , 
 i must up-fil thi osier cage of our 
 with bale weed and precious-ju flower . 
 the earth that 's natur 's mother is her tomb . 
 what is her buri gave , that is her womb ; 
 and from her womb children of diver kind 
 we suck on her natur bosom find ; 
 mani for mani virtu excel , 
 none but for some , and yet all differ . 
 o , mickl is the power grace that lie 
 in plant , herb , stone , and their true qualiti ; 
 for naught so vile that on the earth doth live 
 but to the earth some special good doth give ; 
 nor aught so good but , strain 'd from that fair use , 
 revolt from true birth , stumbl on abus . 
 virtu itself turn vice , be misappli , 
 and vice sometim 's by action dignifi . 
 within the infant rind of thi small flower 
 poison hath resid , and medicin power ; 
 for thi , be smelt , with that part cheer each part ; 
 be tast , slay all sens with the heart . 
 two such oppos king encamp them still 
 in man as well as herbs- grace and rude will ; 
 and where the worser is predomin , 
 full soon the canker death eat up that plant . 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 rom . good morrow , father . 
 friar . benedicit ! 
 what earli tongu so sweet saluteth me ? 
 young son , it argu a distemp head 
 so soon to bid good morrow to thi bed . 
 care keep hi watch in everi old man 's eye , 
 and where care lodg sleep will never lie ; 
 but where unbruis youth with unstuff 'd brain 
 doth couch hi limb , there golden sleep doth reign . 
 therefor thi earli doth me assur 
 thou art uprou 'd with some distemp'ratur ; 
 or if not so , then here i hit it right- 
 our romeo hath not been in bed to-night . 
 rom . that last is true-th sweeter rest wa mine . 
 friar . god pardon sin ! wast thou with rosalin ? 
 rom . with rosalin , my ghostli father ? no . 
 i have forgot that name , and that name 's woe . 
 friar . that 's my good son ! but where hast thou been then ? 
 rom . i 'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again . 
 i have been feast with mine enemi , 
 where on a sudden one hath wound me 
 that 's by me wound . both our remedi 
 within thi help and holi physic lie . 
 i bear no hatr , bless man , for , lo , 
 my intercess likewis stead my foe . 
 friar . be plain , good son , and home in thi drift 
 riddl confess find but riddl shrift . 
 rom . then plainli know my heart 's dear love is set 
 on the fair daughter of rich capulet ; 
 as mine on her , so her is set on mine , 
 and all combin 'd , save what thou must combin 
 by holi marriag . when , and where , and how 
 we met , we woo 'd , and made exchang of vow , 
 i 'll tell thee as we pass ; but thi i pray , 
 that thou consent to marri us to-day . 
 friar . holi saint franci ! what a chang is here ! 
 is rosalin , that thou didst love so dear , 
 so soon forsaken ? young men 's love then lie 
 not truli in their heart , but in their eye . 
 jesu maria ! what a deal of brine 
 hath wash 'd thi sallow cheek for rosalin ! 
 how much salt water thrown away in wast , 
 to season love , that of it doth not tast ! 
 the sun not yet thi sigh from heaven clear , 
 thi old groan ring yet in mine ancient ear . 
 lo , here upon thi cheek the stain doth sit 
 of an old tear that is not wash 'd off yet . 
 if e'er thou wast thyself , and these woe thine , 
 thou and these woe were all for rosalin . 
 and art thou chang 'd ? pronounc thi sentenc then : 
 women may fall when there 's no strength in men . 
 rom . thou chid'st me oft for love rosalin . 
 friar . for dote , not for love , pupil mine . 
 rom . and bad'st me buri love . 
 friar . not in a grave 
 to lay one in , anoth out to have . 
 rom . i pray thee chide not . she whom i love now 
 doth grace for grace and love for love allow . 
 the other did not so . 
 friar . o , she knew well 
 thi love did read by rote , that could not spell . 
 but come , young waver , come go with me . 
 in one respect i 'll thi assist be ; 
 for thi allianc may so happi prove 
 to turn your household ' rancour to pure love . 
 rom . o , let us henc ! i stand on sudden hast . 
 friar . wise , and slow . they stumbl that run fast . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 a street . 
 
 enter benvolio and mercutio . 
 
 mer . where the devil should thi romeo be ? 
 came he not home to-night ? 
 ben . not to hi father 's . i spoke with hi man . 
 mer . whi , that same pale hard-heart wench , that rosalin , 
 torment him so that he will sure run mad . 
 ben . tybalt , the kinsman to old capulet , 
 hath sent a letter to hi father 's hous . 
 mer . a challeng , on my life . 
 ben . romeo will answer it . 
 mer . ani man that can write may answer a letter . 
 ben . nay , he will answer the letter 's master , how he dare , be 
 dare . 
 mer . ala , poor romeo , he is alreadi dead ! stabb 'd with a white 
 wench 's black eye ; shot through the ear with a love song ; the 
 veri pin of hi heart cleft with the blind bow-boy 's butt-shaft ; 
 and is he a man to encount tybalt ? 
 ben . whi , what is tybalt ? 
 mer . more than princ of cat , i can tell you . o , he 's the 
 courag captain of compliment . he fight as you sing 
 pricksong-keep time , distanc , and proport ; rest me hi 
 minim rest , one , two , and the third in your bosom ! the veri 
 butcher of a silk button , a duellist , a duellist ! a gentleman of 
 the veri first hous , of the first and second caus . ah , the 
 immort passado ! the punto revers ! the hay . 
 ben . the what ? 
 mer . the pox of such antic , lisp , affect fantasticoes- these 
 new tuner of accent ! 'bi jesu , a veri good blade ! a veri tall 
 man ! a veri good whore ! ' whi , is not thi a lament thing , 
 grandsir , that we should be thu afflict with these strang 
 fli , these fashion-mong , these pardona-mi 's , who stand so 
 much on the new form that they can not sit at eas on the old 
 bench ? o , their bone , their bone ! 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 ben . here come romeo ! here come romeo ! 
 mer . without hi roe , like a dri her . o flesh , flesh , how art 
 thou fishifi ! now is he for the number that petrarch flow 
 in . laura , to hi ladi , wa but a kitchen wench ( marri , she had a 
 better love to berhym her ) , dido a dowdi , cleopatra a gypsi , 
 helen and hero hild and harlot , thi be a gray eye or so , 
 but not to the purpos . signior romeo , bon jour ! there 's a french 
 salut to your french slop . you gave us the counterfeit 
 fairli last night . 
 rom . good morrow to you both . what counterfeit did i give you ? 
 mer . the slip , sir , the slip . can you not conceiv ? 
 rom . pardon , good mercutio . my busi wa great , and in such a 
 case as mine a man may strain courtesi . 
 mer . that 's as much as to say , such a case as your constrain a 
 man to bow in the ham . 
 rom . mean , to cursi . 
 mer . thou hast most kindli hit it . 
 rom . a most courteou exposit . 
 mer . nay , i am the veri pink of courtesi . 
 rom . pink for flower . 
 mer . right . 
 rom . whi , then is my pump well-flow 'd . 
 mer . well said ! follow me thi jest now till thou hast worn out thi 
 pump , that , when the singl sole of it is worn , the jest may 
 remain , after the wear , sole singular . 
 rom . o single-sold jest , sole singular for the singl ! 
 mer . come between us , good benvolio ! my wit faint . 
 rom . swit and spur , swit and spur ! or i 'll cri a match . 
 mer . nay , if our wit run the wild-goos chase , i am done ; for thou 
 hast more of the wild goos in one of thi wit than , i am sure , i 
 have in my whole five . wa i with you there for the goos ? 
 rom . thou wast never with me for anyth when thou wast not there 
 for the goos . 
 mer . i will bite thee by the ear for that jest . 
 rom . nay , good goos , bite not ! 
 mer . thi wit is a veri bitter sweet ; it is a most sharp sauc . 
 rom . and is it not , then , well serv 'd in to a sweet goos ? 
 mer . o , here 's a wit of cheveril , that stretch from an inch 
 narrow to an ell broad ! 
 rom . i stretch it out for that word 'broad , ' which , ad to the 
 goos , prove thee far and wide a broad goos . 
 mer . whi , is not thi better now than groan for love ? now art 
 thou sociabl , now art thou romeo ; now art thou what thou art , by 
 art as well as by natur . for thi drivel love is like a 
 great natur that run loll up and down to hide hi baubl in 
 a hole . 
 ben . stop there , stop there ! 
 mer . thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair . 
 ben . thou wouldst els have made thi tale larg . 
 mer . o , thou art deceiv 'd ! i would have made it short ; for i wa 
 come to the whole depth of my tale , and meant inde to occupi 
 the argument no longer . 
 rom . here 's goodli gear ! 
 
 enter nurs and her man [ peter ] . 
 
 mer . a sail , a sail ! 
 ben . two , two ! a shirt and a smock . 
 nurs . peter ! 
 peter . anon . 
 nurs . my fan , peter . 
 mer . good peter , to hide her face ; for her fan 's the fairer face of 
 the two . 
 nurs . god ye good morrow , gentlemen . 
 mer . god ye good-den , fair gentlewoman . 
 nurs . is it good-den ? 
 mer . 't is no less , i tell ye ; for the bawdi hand of the dial is now 
 upon the prick of noon . 
 nurs . out upon you ! what a man are you ! 
 rom . one , gentlewoman , that god hath made for himself to mar . 
 nurs . by my troth , it is well said . 'for himself to mar , ' quoth 
 ' a ? gentlemen , can ani of you tell me where i may find the young 
 romeo ? 
 rom . i can tell you ; but young romeo will be older when you have 
 found him than he wa when you sought him . i am the youngest of 
 that name , for fault of a wors . 
 nurs . you say well . 
 mer . yea , is the worst well ? veri well took , i ' faith ! wise , 
 wise . 
 nurs . if you be he , sir , i desir some confid with you . 
 ben . she will endit him to some supper . 
 mer . a bawd , a bawd , a bawd ! so ho ! 
 rom . what hast thou found ? 
 mer . no hare , sir ; unless a hare , sir , in a lenten pie , that is 
 someth stale and hoar ere it be spent 
 he walk by them and sing . 
 
 an old hare hoar , 
 and an old hare hoar , 
 is veri good meat in lent ; 
 but a hare that is hoar 
 is too much for a score 
 when it hoar ere it be spent . 
 
 romeo , will you come to your father 's ? we 'll to dinner thither . 
 rom . i will follow you . 
 mer . farewel , ancient ladi . farewel , 
 [ sing ] ladi , ladi , ladi . 
 exeunt mercutio , benvolio . 
 nurs . marri , farewel ! i pray you , sir , what sauci merchant wa 
 thi that wa so full of hi roperi ? 
 rom . a gentleman , nurs , that love to hear himself talk and will 
 speak more in a minut than he will stand to in a month . 
 nurs . an ' a speak anyth against me , i 'll take him down , an ' a 
 were lustier than he is , and twenti such jack ; and if i can not , 
 i 'll find those that shall . scurvi knave ! i am none of hi 
 flirt-gil ; i am none of hi skains-mat . and thou must stand 
 by too , and suffer everi knave to use me at hi pleasur ! 
 peter . i saw no man use you at hi pleasur . if i had , my weapon 
 should quickli have been out , i warrant you . i dare draw as soon 
 as anoth man , if i see occas in a good quarrel , and the law 
 on my side . 
 nurs . now , afor god , i am so vex that everi part about me 
 quiver . scurvi knave ! pray you , sir , a word ; and , as i told you , 
 my young ladi bid me enquir you out . what she bid me say , i will 
 keep to myself ; but first let me tell ye , if ye should lead her 
 into a fool 's paradis , as they say , it were a veri gross kind of 
 behaviour , as they say ; for the gentlewoman is young ; and 
 therefor , if you should deal doubl with her , truli it were an 
 ill thing to be off'r to ani gentlewoman , and veri weak deal . 
 rom . nurs , commend me to thi ladi and mistress . i protest unto 
 thee- 
 nurs . good heart , and i faith i will tell her as much . lord , 
 lord ! she will be a joy woman . 
 rom . what wilt thou tell her , nurs ? thou dost not mark me . 
 nurs . i will tell her , sir , that you do protest , which , as i take 
 it , is a gentlemanlik offer . 
 rom . bid her devis 
 some mean to come to shrift thi afternoon ; 
 and there she shall at friar laurenc ' cell 
 be shriv 'd and marri . here is for thi pain . 
 nurs . no , truli , sir ; not a penni . 
 rom . go to ! i say you shall . 
 nurs . thi afternoon , sir ? well , she shall be there . 
 rom . and stay , good nurs , behind the abbey wall . 
 within thi hour my man shall be with thee 
 and bring thee cord made like a tackl stair , 
 which to the high topgal of my joy 
 must be my convoy in the secret night . 
 farewel . be trusti , and i 'll quit thi pain . 
 farewel . commend me to thi mistress . 
 nurs . now god in heaven bless thee ! hark you , sir . 
 rom . what say'st thou , my dear nurs ? 
 nurs . is your man secret ? did you ne'er hear say , 
 two may keep counsel , put one away ? 
 rom . i warrant thee my man 's as true as steel . 
 nurs . well , sir , my mistress is the sweetest ladi . lord , lord ! 
 when 't wa a littl prate thing- o , there is a nobleman in 
 town , one pari , that would fain lay knife aboard ; but she , good 
 soul , had as liev see a toad , a veri toad , as see him . i anger 
 her sometim , and tell her that pari is the proper man ; but 
 i 'll warrant you , when i say so , she look as pale as ani clout 
 in the versal world . doth not rosemari and romeo begin both with 
 a letter ? 
 rom . ay , nurs ; what of that ? both with an r. 
 nurs . ah , mocker ! that 's the dog 's name . r is for the- no ; i know 
 it begin with some other letter ; and she hath the prettiest 
 sententi of it , of you and rosemari , that it would do you good 
 to hear it . 
 rom . commend me to thi ladi . 
 nurs . ay , a thousand time . [ exit romeo . ] peter ! 
 peter . anon . 
 nurs . peter , take my fan , and go befor , and apac . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 capulet 's orchard . 
 
 enter juliet . 
 
 jul . the clock struck nine when i did send the nurs ; 
 in half an hour she 'promi 'd to return . 
 perchanc she can not meet him . that 's not so . 
 o , she is lame ! love 's herald should be thought , 
 which ten time faster glide than the sun 's beam 
 drive back shadow over low'r hill . 
 therefor do nimble-pinion 'd dove draw love , 
 and therefor hath the wind-swift cupid wing . 
 now is the sun upon the highmost hill 
 of thi day 's journey , and from nine till twelv 
 is three long hour ; yet she is not come . 
 had she affect and warm youth blood , 
 she would be as swift in motion as a ball ; 
 my word would bandi her to my sweet love , 
 and hi to me , 
 but old folk , mani feign as they were dead- 
 unwieldi , slow , heavi and pale as lead . 
 
 enter nurs [ and peter ] . 
 
 o god , she come ! o honey nurs , what news ? 
 hast thou met with him ? send thi man away . 
 nurs . peter , stay at the gate . 
 [ exit peter . ] 
 jul . now , good sweet nurse- o lord , whi look'st thou sad ? 
 though news be sad , yet tell them merrili ; 
 if good , thou shamest the music of sweet news 
 by play it to me with so sour a face . 
 nurs . i am aweari , give me leav awhil . 
 fie , how my bone ach ! what a jaunc have i had ! 
 jul . i would thou hadst my bone , and i thi news . 
 nay , come , i pray thee speak . good , good nurs , speak . 
 nurs . jesu , what hast ! can you not stay awhil ? 
 do you not see that i am out of breath ? 
 jul . how art thou out of breath when thou hast breath 
 to say to me that thou art out of breath ? 
 the excus that thou dost make in thi delay 
 is longer than the tale thou dost excus . 
 is thi news good or bad ? answer to that . 
 say either , and i 'll stay the circumst . 
 let me be satisfi , is't good or bad ? 
 nurs . well , you have made a simpl choic ; you know not how to 
 choos a man . romeo ? no , not he . though hi face be better than 
 ani man 's , yet hi leg excel all men 's ; and for a hand and a 
 foot , and a bodi , though they be not to be talk 'd on , yet they 
 are past compar . he is not the flower of courtesi , but , i 'll 
 warrant him , as gentl as a lamb . go thi way , wench ; serv god . 
 what , have you din 'd at home ? 
 jul . no , no . but all thi did i know befor . 
 what say he of our marriag ? what of that ? 
 nurs . lord , how my head ach ! what a head have i ! 
 it beat as it would fall in twenti piec . 
 my back o ' t ' other side , - ah , my back , my back ! 
 beshrew your heart for send me about 
 to catch my death with jaunc up and down ! 
 jul . i ' faith , i am sorri that thou art not well . 
 sweet , sweet , sweet nurs , tell me , what say my love ? 
 nurs . your love say , like an honest gentleman , and a courteou , 
 and a kind , and a handsom ; and , i warrant , a virtuous- where is 
 your mother ? 
 jul . where is my mother ? whi , she is within . 
 where should she be ? how oddli thou repliest ! 
 'your love say , like an honest gentleman , 
 `` where is your mother ? '' ' 
 nurs . o god 's ladi dear ! 
 are you so hot ? marri come up , i trow . 
 is thi the poultic for my ach bone ? 
 henceforward do your messag yourself . 
 jul . here 's such a coil ! come , what say romeo ? 
 nurs . have you got leav to go to shrift to-day ? 
 jul . i have . 
 nurs . then hie you henc to friar laurenc ' cell ; 
 there stay a husband to make you a wife . 
 now come the wanton blood up in your cheek : 
 they 'll be in scarlet straight at ani news . 
 hie you to church ; i must anoth way , 
 to fetch a ladder , by the which your love 
 must climb a bird 's nest soon when it is dark . 
 i am the drudg , and toil in your delight ; 
 but you shall bear the burthen soon at night . 
 go ; i 'll to dinner ; hie you to the cell . 
 jul . hie to high fortun ! honest nurs , farewel . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 friar laurenc 's cell . 
 
 enter friar [ laurenc ] and romeo . 
 
 friar . so smile the heaven upon thi holi act 
 that after-hour with sorrow chide us not ! 
 rom . amen , amen ! but come what sorrow can , 
 it can not countervail the exchang of joy 
 that one short minut give me in her sight . 
 do thou but close our hand with holi word , 
 then love-devour death do what he dare- 
 it is enough i may but call her mine . 
 friar . these violent delight have violent end 
 and in their triumph die , like fire and powder , 
 which , as they kiss , consum . the sweetest honey 
 is loathsom in hi own delici 
 and in the tast confound the appetit . 
 therefor love moder : long love doth so ; 
 too swift arriv as tardi as too slow . 
 
 enter juliet . 
 
 here come the ladi . o , so light a foot 
 will ne'er wear out the everlast flint . 
 a lover may bestrid the gossam 
 that idl in the wanton summer air , 
 and yet not fall ; so light is vaniti . 
 jul . good even to my ghostli confessor . 
 friar . romeo shall thank thee , daughter , for us both . 
 jul . as much to him , els is hi thank too much . 
 rom . ah , juliet , if the measur of thi joy 
 be heap 'd like mine , and that thi skill be more 
 to blazon it , then sweeten with thi breath 
 thi neighbour air , and let rich music 's tongu 
 unfold the imagin 'd happi that both 
 receiv in either by thi dear encount . 
 jul . conceit , more rich in matter than in word , 
 brag of hi substanc , not of ornament . 
 they are but beggar that can count their worth ; 
 but my true love is grown to such excess 
 can not sum up sum of half my wealth . 
 friar . come , come with me , and we will make short work ; 
 for , by your leav , you shall not stay alon 
 till holi church incorpor two in one . 
 [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 a public place . 
 
 enter mercutio , benvolio , and men . 
 
 ben . i pray thee , good mercutio , let 's retir . 
 the day is hot , the capulet abroad . 
 and if we meet , we shall not scape a brawl , 
 for now , these hot day , is the mad blood stir . 
 mer . thou art like one of these fellow that , when he enter the 
 confin of a tavern , clap me hi sword upon the tabl and say 
 'god send me no need of thee ! ' and by the oper of the second 
 cup draw him on the drawer , when inde there is no need . 
 ben . am i like such a fellow ? 
 mer . come , come , thou art as hot a jack in thi mood as ani in 
 itali ; and as soon move to be moodi , and as soon moodi to be 
 move . 
 ben . and what to ? 
 mer . nay , an there were two such , we should have none shortli , for 
 one would kill the other . thou ! whi , thou wilt quarrel with a man 
 that hath a hair more or a hair less in hi beard than thou hast . 
 thou wilt quarrel with a man for crack nut , have no other 
 reason but becaus thou hast hazel eye . what eye but such an eye 
 would spi out such a quarrel ? thi head is as full of quarrel as 
 an egg is full of meat ; and yet thi head hath been beaten as 
 addl as an egg for quarrel . thou hast quarrel 'd with a man 
 for cough in the street , becaus he hath waken thi dog that 
 hath lain asleep in the sun . didst thou not fall out with a 
 tailor for wear hi new doublet befor easter , with anoth 
 for tie hi new shoe with an old riband ? and yet thou wilt 
 tutor me from quarrel ! 
 ben . an i were so apt to quarrel as thou art , ani man should buy 
 the fee simpl of my life for an hour and a quarter . 
 mer . the fee simpl ? o simpl ! 
 
 enter tybalt and other . 
 
 ben . by my head , here come the capulet . 
 mer . by my heel , i care not . 
 tyb . follow me close , for i will speak to them . 
 gentlemen , good den . a word with one of you . 
 mer . and but one word with one of us ? 
 coupl it with someth ; make it a word and a blow . 
 tyb . you shall find me apt enough to that , sir , an you will give me 
 occas . 
 mer . could you not take some occas without give 
 tyb . mercutio , thou consortest with romeo . 
 mer . consort ? what , dost thou make us minstrel ? an thou make 
 minstrel of us , look to hear noth but discord . here 's my 
 fiddlestick ; here 's that shall make you danc . zound , consort ! 
 ben . we talk here in the public haunt of men . 
 either withdraw unto some privat place 
 and reason coldli of your grievanc , 
 or els depart . here all eye gaze on us . 
 mer . men 's eye were made to look , and let them gaze . 
 i will not budg for no man 's pleasur , 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 tyb . well , peac be with you , sir . here come my man . 
 mer . but i 'll be hang 'd , sir , if he wear your liveri . 
 marri , go befor to field , he 'll be your follow ! 
 your worship in that sens may call him man . 
 tyb . romeo , the love i bear thee can afford 
 no better term than thi : thou art a villain . 
 rom . tybalt , the reason that i have to love thee 
 doth much excus the appertain rage 
 to such a greet . villain am i none . 
 therefor farewel . i see thou knowest me not . 
 tyb . boy , thi shall not excus the injuri 
 that thou hast done me ; therefor turn and draw . 
 rom . i do protest i never injur 'd thee , 
 but love thee better than thou canst devis 
 till thou shalt know the reason of my love ; 
 and so good capulet , which name i tender 
 as dearli as mine own , be satisfi . 
 mer . o calm , dishonour , vile submiss ! 
 alla stoccata carri it away . [ draw . ] 
 tybalt , you ratcatch , will you walk ? 
 tyb . what wouldst thou have with me ? 
 mer . good king of cat , noth but one of your nine live . that i 
 mean to make bold withal , and , as you shall use me hereaft , 
 dry-beat the rest of the eight . will you pluck your sword out of 
 hi pitcher by the ear ? make hast , lest mine be about your ear 
 ere it be out . 
 tyb . i am for you . [ draw . ] 
 rom . gentl mercutio , put thi rapier up . 
 mer . come , sir , your passado ! 
 [ they fight . ] 
 rom . draw , benvolio ; beat down their weapon . 
 gentlemen , for shame ! forbear thi outrag ! 
 tybalt , mercutio , the princ expressli hath 
 forbid thi bandi in verona street . 
 hold , tybalt ! good mercutio ! 
 tybalt under romeo 's arm thrust mercutio in , and fli 
 [ with hi follow ] . 
 mer . i am hurt . 
 a plagu o ' both your hous ! i am sped . 
 is he gone and hath noth ? 
 ben . what , art thou hurt ? 
 mer . ay , ay , a scratch , a scratch . marri , 't is enough . 
 where is my page ? go , villain , fetch a surgeon . 
 [ exit page . ] 
 rom . courag , man . the hurt can not be much . 
 mer . no , 't is not so deep as a well , nor so wide as a church door ; 
 but 't is enough , 'twill serv . ask for me to-morrow , and you 
 shall find me a grave man . i am pepper , i warrant , for thi 
 world . a plagu o ' both your hous ! zound , a dog , a rat , a 
 mous , a cat , to scratch a man to death ! a braggart , a rogu , a 
 villain , that fight by the book of arithmet ! whi the devil 
 came you between us ? i wa hurt under your arm . 
 rom . i thought all for the best . 
 mer . help me into some hous , benvolio , 
 or i shall faint . a plagu o ' both your hous ! 
 they have made worm ' meat of me . i have it , 
 and soundli too . your hous ! 
 [ exit . [ support by benvolio ] . 
 rom . thi gentleman , the princ 's near alli , 
 my veri friend , hath got thi mortal hurt 
 in my behalf- my reput stain 'd 
 with tybalt 's slander- tybalt , that an hour 
 hath been my kinsman . o sweet juliet , 
 thi beauti hath made me effemin 
 and in my temper soft'n valour 's steel 
 
 enter benvolio . 
 
 ben . o romeo , romeo , brave mercutio 's dead ! 
 that gallant spirit hath aspir 'd the cloud , 
 which too untim here did scorn the earth . 
 rom . thi day 's black fate on moe day doth depend ; 
 thi but begin the woe other must end . 
 
 enter tybalt . 
 
 ben . here come the furiou tybalt back again . 
 rom . aliv in triumph , and mercutio slain ? 
 away to heaven respect leniti , 
 and fire-ey 'd furi be my conduct now ! 
 now , tybalt , take the 'villain ' back again 
 that late thou gavest me ; for mercutio 's soul 
 is but a littl way abov our head , 
 stay for thine to keep him compani . 
 either thou or i , or both , must go with him . 
 tyb . thou , wretch boy , that didst consort him here , 
 shalt with him henc . 
 rom . thi shall determin that . 
 they fight . tybalt fall . 
 ben . romeo , away , be gone ! 
 the citizen are up , and tybalt slain . 
 stand not amaz 'd . the princ will doom thee death 
 if thou art taken . henc , be gone , away ! 
 rom . o , i am fortun 's fool ! 
 ben . whi dost thou stay ? 
 exit romeo . 
 enter citizen . 
 
 citizen . which way ran he that kill 'd mercutio ? 
 tybalt , that murther , which way ran he ? 
 ben . there lie that tybalt . 
 citizen . up , sir , go with me . 
 i charg thee in the princ 's name obey . 
 
 enter princ [ attend ] , old montagu , capulet , their wive , 
 and [ other ] . 
 
 princ . where are the vile beginn of thi fray ? 
 ben . o nobl princ . i can discov all 
 the unlucki manag of thi fatal brawl . 
 there lie the man , slain by young romeo , 
 that slew thi kinsman , brave mercutio . 
 cap . wife . tybalt , my cousin ! o my brother 's child ! 
 o princ ! o husband ! o , the blood is spill 'd 
 of my dear kinsman ! princ , as thou art true , 
 for blood of our shed blood of montagu . 
 o cousin , cousin ! 
 princ . benvolio , who began thi bloodi fray ? 
 ben . tybalt , here slain , whom romeo 's hand did stay . 
 romeo , that spoke him fair , bid him bethink 
 how nice the quarrel wa , and urg 'd withal 
 your high displeasur . all this- utter 
 with gentl breath , calm look , knee humbl bow'd- 
 could not take truce with the unruli spleen 
 of tybalt deaf to peac , but that he tilt 
 with pierc steel at bold mercutio 's breast ; 
 who , all as hot , turn deadli point to point , 
 and , with a martial scorn , with one hand beat 
 cold death asid and with the other send 
 it back to tybalt , whose dexter 
 retort it . romeo he cri aloud , 
 'hold , friend ! friend , part ! ' and swifter than hi tongu , 
 hi agil arm beat down their fatal point , 
 and 'twixt them rush ; underneath whose arm 
 an enviou thrust from tybalt hit the life 
 of stout mercutio , and then tybalt fled ; 
 but by-and-bi come back to romeo , 
 who had but newli entertain 'd reveng , 
 and to't they go like lightn ; for , ere i 
 could draw to part them , wa stout tybalt slain ; 
 and , as he fell , did romeo turn and fli . 
 thi is the truth , or let benvolio die . 
 cap . wife . he is a kinsman to the montagu ; 
 affect make him fals , he speak not true . 
 some twenti of them fought in thi black strife , 
 and all those twenti could but kill one life . 
 i beg for justic , which thou , princ , must give . 
 romeo slew tybalt ; romeo must not live . 
 princ . romeo slew him ; he slew mercutio . 
 who now the price of hi dear blood doth owe ? 
 mon . not romeo , princ ; he wa mercutio 's friend ; 
 hi fault conclud but what the law should end , 
 the life of tybalt . 
 princ . and for that offenc 
 immedi we do exil him henc . 
 i have an interest in your hate 's proceed , 
 my blood for your rude brawl doth lie a-bleed ; 
 but i 'll amerc you with so strong a fine 
 that you shall all repent the loss of mine . 
 i will be deaf to plead and excus ; 
 nor tear nor prayer shall purchas out abus . 
 therefor use none . let romeo henc in hast , 
 els , when he is found , that hour is hi last . 
 bear henc thi bodi , and attend our will . 
 merci but murder , pardon those that kill . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 capulet 's orchard . 
 
 enter juliet alon . 
 
 jul . gallop apac , you fiery-foot steed , 
 toward phoebu ' lodg ! such a wagon 
 as phaeton would whip you to the west 
 and bring in cloudi night immedi . 
 spread thi close curtain , love-perform night , 
 that runaway eye may wink , and romeo 
 leap to these arm untalk 'd of and unseen . 
 lover can see to do their amor rite 
 by their own beauti ; or , if love be blind , 
 it best agre with night . come , civil night , 
 thou sober-suit matron , all in black , 
 and learn me how to lose a win match , 
 play 'd for a pair of stainless maidenhood . 
 hood my unmann 'd blood , bate in my cheek , 
 with thi black mantl till strang love , grown bold , 
 think true love act simpl modesti . 
 come , night ; come , romeo ; come , thou day in night ; 
 for thou wilt lie upon the wing of night 
 whiter than new snow upon a raven 's back . 
 come , gentl night ; come , love , black-brow 'd night ; 
 give me my romeo ; and , when he shall die , 
 take him and cut him out in littl star , 
 and he will make the face of heaven so fine 
 that all the world will be in love with night 
 and pay no worship to the garish sun . 
 o , i have bought the mansion of a love , 
 but not possess 'd it ; and though i am sold , 
 not yet enjoy 'd . so tediou is thi day 
 as is the night befor some festiv 
 to an impati child that hath new robe 
 and may not wear them . o , here come my nurs , 
 
 enter nurs , with cord . 
 
 and she bring news ; and everi tongu that speak 
 but romeo 's name speak heavenli eloqu . 
 now , nurs , what news ? what hast thou there ? the cord 
 that romeo bid thee fetch ? 
 nurs . ay , ay , the cord . 
 [ throw them down . ] 
 jul . ay me ! what news ? whi dost thou wring thi hand 
 nurs . ah , weraday ! he 's dead , he 's dead , he 's dead ! 
 we are undon , ladi , we are undon ! 
 alack the day ! he 's gone , he 's kill 'd , he 's dead ! 
 jul . can heaven be so enviou ? 
 nurs . romeo can , 
 though heaven can not . o romeo , romeo ! 
 who ever would have thought it ? romeo ! 
 jul . what devil art thou that dost torment me thu ? 
 thi tortur should be roar 'd in dismal hell . 
 hath romeo slain himself ? say thou but ' i , ' 
 and that bare vowel ' i ' shall poison more 
 than the death-dart eye of cockatric . 
 i am not i , if there be such an ' i ' ; 
 or those eye shut that make thee answer ' i . ' 
 if be be slain , say ' i ' ; or if not , 'no . ' 
 brief sound determin of my weal or woe . 
 nurs . i saw the wound , i saw it with mine eye , 
 ( god save the mark ! ) here on hi manli breast . 
 a piteou cors , a bloodi piteou cors ; 
 pale , pale as ash , all bedaub 'd in blood , 
 all in gore-blood . i swound at the sight . 
 jul . o , break , my heart ! poor bankrout , break at onc ! 
 to prison , eye ; ne'er look on liberti ! 
 vile earth , to earth resign ; end motion here , 
 and thou and romeo press one heavi bier ! 
 nurs . o tybalt , tybalt , the best friend i had ! 
 o courteou tybalt ! honest gentleman 
 that ever i should live to see thee dead ! 
 jul . what storm is thi that blow so contrari ? 
 is romeo slaught'r , and is tybalt dead ? 
 my dear-lov 'd cousin , and my dearer lord ? 
 then , dread trumpet , sound the gener doom ! 
 for who is live , if those two are gone ? 
 nurs . tybalt is gone , and romeo banish ; 
 romeo that kill 'd him , he is banish . 
 jul . o god ! did romeo 's hand shed tybalt 's blood ? 
 nurs . it did , it did ! ala the day , it did ! 
 jul . o serpent heart , hid with a flow'r face ! 
 did ever dragon keep so fair a cave ? 
 beauti tyrant ! fiend angel ! 
 dove-feath 'd raven ! wolvish-raven lamb ! 
 despis substanc of divinest show ! 
 just opposit to what thou justli seem'st- 
 a damn saint , an honour villain ! 
 o natur , what hadst thou to do in hell 
 when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend 
 in mortal paradis of such sweet flesh ? 
 wa ever book contain such vile matter 
 so fairli bound ? o , that deceit should dwell 
 in such a gorgeou palac ! 
 nurs . there 's no trust , 
 no faith , no honesti in men ; all perjur 'd , 
 all forsworn , all naught , all dissembl . 
 ah , where 's my man ? give me some aqua vita . 
 these grief , these woe , these sorrow make me old . 
 shame come to romeo ! 
 jul . blister 'd be thi tongu 
 for such a wish ! he wa not born to shame . 
 upon hi brow shame is asham 'd to sit ; 
 for 't is a throne where honour may be crown 'd 
 sole monarch of the univers earth . 
 o , what a beast wa i to chide at him ! 
 nurs . will you speak well of him that kill 'd your cousin ? 
 jul . shall i speak ill of him that is my husband ? 
 ah , poor my lord , what tongu shall smooth thi name 
 when i , thi three-hour wife , have mangl it ? 
 but wherefor , villain , didst thou kill my cousin ? 
 that villain cousin would have kill 'd my husband . 
 back , foolish tear , back to your nativ spring ! 
 your tributari drop belong to woe , 
 which you , mistak , offer up to joy . 
 my husband live , that tybalt would have slain ; 
 and tybalt 's dead , that would have slain my husband . 
 all thi is comfort ; wherefor weep i then ? 
 some word there wa , worser than tybalt 's death , 
 that murd'r me . i would forget it fain ; 
 but o , it press to my memori 
 like damn guilti deed to sinner ' mind ! 
 'tybalt is dead , and romeo- banish . ' 
 that 'banish , ' that one word 'banish , ' 
 hath slain ten thousand tybalt . tybalt 's death 
 wa woe enough , if it had end there ; 
 or , if sour woe delight in fellowship 
 and needli will be rank 'd with other grief , 
 whi follow not , when she said 'tybalt 's dead , ' 
 thi father , or thi mother , nay , or both , 
 which modern lament might have mov 'd ? 
 but with a rearward follow tybalt 's death , 
 'romeo is banished'- to speak that word 
 is father , mother , tybalt , romeo , juliet , 
 all slain , all dead . 'romeo is banished'- 
 there is no end , no limit , measur , bound , 
 in that word 's death ; no word can that woe sound . 
 where is my father and my mother , nurs ? 
 nurs . weep and wail over tybalt 's cors . 
 will you go to them ? i will bring you thither . 
 jul . wash they hi wound with tear ? mine shall be spent , 
 when their are dri , for romeo 's banish . 
 take up those cord . poor rope , you are beguil 'd , 
 both you and i , for romeo is exil 'd . 
 he made you for a highway to my bed ; 
 but i , a maid , die maiden-widow . 
 come , cord ; come , nurs . i 'll to my wed bed ; 
 and death , not romeo , take my maidenhead ! 
 nurs . hie to your chamber . i 'll find romeo 
 to comfort you . i wot well where he is . 
 hark ye , your romeo will be here at night . 
 i 'll to him ; he is hid at laurenc ' cell . 
 jul . o , find him ! give thi ring to my true knight 
 and bid him come to take hi last farewel . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 friar laurenc 's cell . 
 
 enter friar [ laurenc ] . 
 
 friar . romeo , come forth ; come forth , thou fear man . 
 afflict is enanmour 'd of thi part , 
 and thou art wed to calam . 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 rom . father , what news ? what is the princ 's doom 
 what sorrow crave acquaint at my hand 
 that i yet know not ? 
 friar . too familiar 
 is my dear son with such sour compani . 
 i bring thee tide of the princ 's doom . 
 rom . what less than doomsday is the princ 's doom ? 
 friar . a gentler judgment vanish 'd from hi lips- 
 not bodi 's death , but bodi 's banish . 
 rom . ha , banish ? be merci , say 'death ' ; 
 for exil hath more terror in hi look , 
 much more than death . do not say 'banish . ' 
 friar . henc from verona art thou banish . 
 be patient , for the world is broad and wide . 
 rom . there is no world without verona wall , 
 but purgatori , tortur , hell itself . 
 henc banish is banish 'd from the world , 
 and world 's exil is death . then 'banish ' 
 is death misterm 'd . call death 'banish , ' 
 thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe 
 and smilest upon the stroke that murder me . 
 friar . o deadli sin ! o rude unthank ! 
 thi fault our law call death ; but the kind princ , 
 take thi part , hath rush 'd asid the law , 
 and turn 'd that black word death to banish . 
 thi is dear merci , and thou seest it not . 
 rom . 't is tortur , and not merci . heaven is here , 
 where juliet live ; and everi cat and dog 
 and littl mous , everi unworthi thing , 
 live here in heaven and may look on her ; 
 but romeo may not . more valid , 
 more honour state , more courtship live 
 in carrion fli than romeo . they may seiz 
 on the white wonder of dear juliet 's hand 
 and steal immort bless from her lip , 
 who , even in pure and vestal modesti , 
 still blush , as think their own kiss sin ; 
 but romeo may not- he is banish . 
 thi may fli do , when i from thi must fli ; 
 they are free men , but i am banish . 
 and sayest thou yet that exil is not death ? 
 hadst thou no poison mix 'd , no sharp-ground knife , 
 no sudden mean of death , though ne'er so mean , 
 but 'banish ' to kill me- 'banish ' ? 
 o friar , the damn use that word in hell ; 
 howl attend it ! how hast thou the heart , 
 be a divin , a ghostli confessor , 
 a sin-absolv , and my friend profess 'd , 
 to mangl me with that word 'banish ' ? 
 friar . thou fond mad man , hear me a littl speak . 
 rom . o , thou wilt speak again of banish . 
 friar . i 'll give thee armour to keep off that word ; 
 advers 's sweet milk , philosophi , 
 to comfort thee , though thou art banish . 
 rom . yet 'banish ' ? hang up philosophi ! 
 unless philosophi can make a juliet , 
 displant a town , revers a princ 's doom , 
 it help not , it prevail not . talk no more . 
 friar . o , then i see that madmen have no ear . 
 rom . how should they , when that wise men have no eye ? 
 friar . let me disput with thee of thi estat . 
 rom . thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel . 
 wert thou as young as i , juliet thi love , 
 an hour but marri , tybalt murder , 
 dote like me , and like me banish , 
 then mightst thou speak , then mightst thou tear thi hair , 
 and fall upon the ground , as i do now , 
 take the measur of an unmad grave . 
 knock [ within ] . 
 friar . aris ; one knock . good romeo , hide thyself . 
 rom . not i ; unless the breath of heartsick groan , 
 mist-lik infold me from the search of eye . knock . 
 friar . hark , how they knock ! who 's there ? romeo , aris ; 
 thou wilt be taken.- stay awhil ! - stand up ; knock . 
 run to my study.- by-and-bi ! - god 's will , 
 what simpl is this.- i come , i come ! knock . 
 who knock so hard ? whenc come you ? what 's your will 
 nurs . [ within ] let me come in , and you shall know my errand . 
 i come from ladi juliet . 
 friar . welcom then . 
 
 enter nurs . 
 
 nurs . o holi friar , o , tell me , holi friar 
 where is my ladi 's lord , where 's romeo ? 
 friar . there on the ground , with hi own tear made drunk . 
 nurs . o , he is even in my mistress ' case , 
 just in her case ! 
 friar . o woeful sympathi ! 
 piteou predica ! 
 nurs . even so lie she , 
 blubb'r and weep , weep and blubber . 
 stand up , stand up ! stand , an you be a man . 
 for juliet 's sake , for her sake , rise and stand ! 
 whi should you fall into so deep an o ? 
 rom . ( rise ) nurse- 
 nurs . ah sir ! ah sir ! well , death 's the end of all . 
 rom . spakest thou of juliet ? how is it with her ? 
 doth not she think me an old murther , 
 now i have stain 'd the childhood of our joy 
 with blood remov 'd but littl from her own ? 
 where is she ? and how doth she ! and what say 
 my conceal 'd ladi to our cancel 'd love ? 
 nurs . o , she say noth , sir , but weep and weep ; 
 and now fall on her bed , and then start up , 
 and tybalt call ; and then on romeo cri , 
 and then down fall again . 
 rom . as if that name , 
 shot from the deadli level of a gun , 
 did murther her ; as that name 's curs hand 
 murder 'd her kinsman . o , tell me , friar , tell me , 
 in what vile part of thi anatomi 
 doth my name lodg ? tell me , that i may sack 
 the hate mansion . [ draw hi dagger . ] 
 friar . hold thi desper hand . 
 art thou a man ? thi form cri out thou art ; 
 thi tear are womanish , thi wild act denot 
 the unreason furi of a beast . 
 unseemli woman in a seem man ! 
 or ill-beseem beast in seem both ! 
 thou hast amaz 'd me . by my holi order , 
 i thought thi disposit better temper 'd . 
 hast thou slain tybalt ? wilt thou slay thyself ? 
 and slay thi ladi that in thi life live , 
 by do damn hate upon thyself ? 
 whi railest thou on thi birth , the heaven , and earth ? 
 sinc birth and heaven and earth , all three do meet 
 in thee at onc ; which thou at onc wouldst lose . 
 fie , fie , thou shamest thi shape , thi love , thi wit , 
 which , like a usur , abound'st in all , 
 and usest none in that true use inde 
 which should bedeck thi shape , thi love , thi wit . 
 thi nobl shape is but a form of wax 
 digress from the valour of a man ; 
 thi dear love sworn but hollow perjuri , 
 kill that love which thou hast vow 'd to cherish ; 
 thi wit , that ornament to shape and love , 
 misshapen in the conduct of them both , 
 like powder in a skilless soldier 's flask , 
 is get afir by thine own ignor , 
 and thou dismemb'r with thine own defenc . 
 what , rous thee , man ! thi juliet is aliv , 
 for whose dear sake thou wast but late dead . 
 there art thou happi . tybalt would kill thee , 
 but thou slewest tybalt . there art thou happi too . 
 the law , that threat'n death , becom thi friend 
 and turn it to exil . there art thou happi . 
 a pack of bless light upon thi back ; 
 happi court thee in her best array ; 
 but , like a misbhav 'd and sullen wench , 
 thou pout'st upon thi fortun and thi love . 
 take heed , take heed , for such die miser . 
 go get thee to thi love , as wa decre , 
 ascend her chamber , henc and comfort her . 
 but look thou stay not till the watch be set , 
 for then thou canst not pass to mantua , 
 where thou shalt live till we can find a time 
 to blaze your marriag , reconcil your friend , 
 beg pardon of the princ , and call thee back 
 with twenti hundr thousand time more joy 
 than thou went'st forth in lament . 
 go befor , nurs . commend me to thi ladi , 
 and bid her hasten all the hous to bed , 
 which heavi sorrow make them apt unto . 
 romeo is come . 
 nurs . o lord , i could have stay 'd here all the night 
 to hear good counsel . o , what learn is ! 
 my lord , i 'll tell my ladi you will come . 
 rom . do so , and bid my sweet prepar to chide . 
 nurs . here is a ring she bid me give you , sir . 
 hie you , make hast , for it grow veri late . exit . 
 rom . how well my comfort is reviv 'd by thi ! 
 friar . go henc ; good night ; and here stand all your state : 
 either be gone befor the watch be set , 
 or by the break of day disgui 'd from henc . 
 sojourn in mantua . i 'll find out your man , 
 and he shall signifi from time to time 
 everi good hap to you that chanc here . 
 give me thi hand . 't is late . farewel ; good night . 
 rom . but that a joy past joy call out on me , 
 it were a grief so brief to part with thee . 
 farewel . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 capulet 's hous 
 
 enter old capulet , hi wife , and pari . 
 
 cap . thing have fall'n out , sir , so unluckili 
 that we have had no time to move our daughter . 
 look you , she lov 'd her kinsman tybalt dearli , 
 and so did i. well , we were born to die . 
 't is veri late ; she 'll not come down to-night . 
 i promis you , but for your compani , 
 i would have been abe an hour ago . 
 par . these time of woe afford no tune to woo . 
 madam , good night . commend me to your daughter . 
 ladi . i will , and know her mind earli to-morrow ; 
 to-night she 's mew 'd up to her heavi . 
 cap . sir pari , i will make a desper tender 
 of my child 's love . i think she will be rul 'd 
 in all respect by me ; nay more , i doubt it not . 
 wife , go you to her ere you go to bed ; 
 acquaint her here of my son pari ' love 
 and bid her ( mark you me ? ) on wednesday next- 
 but , soft ! what day is thi ? 
 par . monday , my lord . 
 cap . monday ! ha , ha ! well , wednesday is too soon . 
 thursday let it be- a thursday , tell her 
 she shall be marri to thi nobl earl . 
 will you be readi ? do you like thi hast ? 
 we 'll keep no great ado- a friend or two ; 
 for hark you , tybalt be slain so late , 
 it may be thought we held him carelessli , 
 be our kinsman , if we revel much . 
 therefor we 'll have some half a dozen friend , 
 and there an end . but what say you to thursday ? 
 par . my lord , i would that thursday were to-morrow . 
 cap . well , get you gone . a thursday be it then . 
 go you to juliet ere you go to bed ; 
 prepar her , wife , against thi wed day . 
 farewel , my lord.- light to my chamber , ho ! 
 afor me , it is so veri veri late 
 that we may call it earli by-and-bi . 
 good night . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 capulet 's orchard . 
 
 enter romeo and juliet aloft , at the window . 
 
 jul . wilt thou be gone ? it is not yet near day . 
 it wa the nightingal , and not the lark , 
 that pierc 'd the fear hollow of thine ear . 
 nightli she sing on yond pomegran tree . 
 believ me , love , it wa the nightingal . 
 rom . it wa the lark , the herald of the morn ; 
 no nightingal . look , love , what enviou streak 
 do lace the sever cloud in yonder east . 
 night 's candl are burnt out , and jocund day 
 stand tipto on the misti mountain top . 
 i must be gone and live , or stay and die . 
 jul . yond light is not daylight ; i know it , i . 
 it is some meteor that the sun exhal 
 to be to thee thi night a torchbear 
 and light thee on the way to mantua . 
 therefor stay yet ; thou need'st not to be gone . 
 rom . let me be ta'en , let me be put to death . 
 i am content , so thou wilt have it so . 
 i 'll say yon grey is not the morn 's eye , 
 't is but the pale reflex of cynthia 's brow ; 
 nor that is not the lark whose note do beat 
 the vaulti heaven so high abov our head . 
 i have more care to stay than will to go . 
 come , death , and welcom ! juliet will it so . 
 how is't , my soul ? let 's talk ; it is not day . 
 jul . it is , it is ! hie henc , be gone , away ! 
 it is the lark that sing so out of tune , 
 strain harsh discord and unpleas sharp . 
 some say the lark make sweet divis ; 
 thi doth not so , for she divideth us . 
 some say the lark and loath toad chang 'd eye ; 
 o , now i would they had chang 'd voic too , 
 sinc arm from arm that voic doth us affray , 
 hunt thee henc with hunt's-up to the day ! 
 o , now be gone ! more light and light it grow . 
 rom . more light and light- more dark and dark our woe ! 
 
 enter nurs . 
 
 nurs . madam ! 
 jul . nurs ? 
 nurs . your ladi mother is come to your chamber . 
 the day is broke ; be wari , look about . 
 jul . then , window , let day in , and let life out . 
 [ exit . ] 
 rom . farewel , farewel ! one kiss , and i 'll descend . 
 he goeth down . 
 jul . art thou gone so , my lord , my love , my friend ? 
 i must hear from thee everi day in the hour , 
 for in a minut there are mani day . 
 o , by thi count i shall be much in year 
 ere i again behold my romeo ! 
 rom . farewel ! 
 i will omit no opportun 
 that may convey my greet , love , to thee . 
 jul . o , think'st thou we shall ever meet again ? 
 rom . i doubt it not ; and all these woe shall serv 
 for sweet discours in our time to come . 
 jul . o god , i have an ill-divin soul ! 
 methink i see thee , now thou art below , 
 as one dead in the bottom of a tomb . 
 either my eyesight fail , or thou look'st pale . 
 rom . and trust me , love , in my eye so do you . 
 dri sorrow drink our blood . adieu , adieu ! 
 exit . 
 jul . o fortun , fortun ! all men call thee fickl . 
 if thou art fickl , what dost thou with him 
 that is renown 'd for faith ? be fickl , fortun , 
 for then i hope thou wilt not keep him long 
 but send him back . 
 ladi . [ within ] ho , daughter ! are you up ? 
 jul . who is't that call ? it is my ladi mother . 
 is she not down so late , or up so earli ? 
 what unaccustom 'd caus procur her hither ? 
 
 enter mother . 
 
 ladi . whi , how now , juliet ? 
 jul . madam , i am not well . 
 ladi . evermor weep for your cousin 's death ? 
 what , wilt thou wash him from hi grave with tear ? 
 an if thou couldst , thou couldst not make him live . 
 therefor have done . some grief show much of love ; 
 but much of grief show still some want of wit . 
 jul . yet let me weep for such a feel loss . 
 ladi . so shall you feel the loss , but not the friend 
 which you weep for . 
 jul . feel so the loss , 
 i can not choos but ever weep the friend . 
 ladi . well , girl , thou weep'st not so much for hi death 
 as that the villain live which slaughter 'd him . 
 jul . what villain , madam ? 
 ladi . that same villain romeo . 
 jul . [ asid ] villain and he be mani mile asunder.- 
 god pardon him ! i do , with all my heart ; 
 and yet no man like he doth griev my heart . 
 ladi . that is becaus the traitor murder live . 
 jul . ay , madam , from the reach of these my hand . 
 would none but i might veng my cousin 's death ! 
 ladi . we will have vengeanc for it , fear thou not . 
 then weep no more . i 'll send to one in mantua , 
 where that same banish 'd runag doth live , 
 shall give him such an unaccustom 'd dram 
 that he shall soon keep tybalt compani ; 
 and then i hope thou wilt be satisfi . 
 jul . inde i never shall be satisfi 
 with romeo till i behold him- dead- 
 is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex 'd . 
 madam , if you could find out but a man 
 to bear a poison , i would temper it ; 
 that romeo should , upon receipt thereof , 
 soon sleep in quiet . o , how my heart abhor 
 to hear him nam 'd and can not come to him , 
 to wreak the love i bore my cousin tybalt 
 upon hi bodi that hath slaughter 'd him ! 
 ladi . find thou the mean , and i 'll find such a man . 
 but now i 'll tell thee joy tide , girl . 
 jul . and joy come well in such a needi time . 
 what are they , i beseech your ladyship ? 
 ladi . well , well , thou hast a care father , child ; 
 one who , to put thee from thi heavi , 
 hath sort out a sudden day of joy 
 that thou expect not nor i look 'd not for . 
 jul . madam , in happi time ! what day is that ? 
 ladi . marri , my child , earli next thursday morn 
 the gallant , young , and nobl gentleman , 
 the counti pari , at saint peter 's church , 
 shall happili make thee there a joy bride . 
 jul . now by saint peter 's church , and peter too , 
 he shall not make me there a joy bride ! 
 i wonder at thi hast , that i must wed 
 ere he that should be husband come to woo . 
 i pray you tell my lord and father , madam , 
 i will not marri yet ; and when i do , i swear 
 it shall be romeo , whom you know i hate , 
 rather than pari . these are news inde ! 
 ladi . here come your father . tell him so yourself , 
 and see how be will take it at your hand . 
 
 enter capulet and nurs . 
 
 cap . when the sun set the air doth drizzl dew , 
 but for the sunset of my brother 's son 
 it rain downright . 
 how now ? a conduit , girl ? what , still in tear ? 
 evermor show'r ? in one littl bodi 
 thou counterfeit'st a bark , a sea , a wind : 
 for still thi eye , which i may call the sea , 
 do ebb and flow with tear ; the bark thi bodi is 
 sail in thi salt flood ; the wind , thi sigh , 
 who , rage with thi tear and they with them , 
 without a sudden calm will overset 
 thi tempest-toss bodi . how now , wife ? 
 have you deliv to her our decre ? 
 ladi . ay , sir ; but she will none , she give you thank . 
 i would the fool were marri to her grave ! 
 cap . soft ! take me with you , take me with you , wife . 
 how ? will she none ? doth she not give us thank ? 
 is she not proud ? doth she not count her blest , 
 unworthi as she is , that we have wrought 
 so worthi a gentleman to be her bridegroom ? 
 jul . not proud you have , but thank that you have . 
 proud can i never be of what i hate , 
 but thank even for hate that is meant love . 
 cap . how , how , how , how , choplog ? what is thi ? 
 'proud'- and ' i thank you'- and ' i thank you not'- 
 and yet 'not proud ' ? mistress minion you , 
 thank me no thank , nor proud me no proud , 
 but fettl your fine joint 'gainst thursday next 
 to go with pari to saint peter 's church , 
 or i will drag thee on a hurdl thither . 
 out , you green-sick carrion i out , you baggag ! 
 you tallow-fac ! 
 ladi . fie , fie ! what , are you mad ? 
 jul . good father , i beseech you on my knee , 
 hear me with patienc but to speak a word . 
 cap . hang thee , young baggag ! disobedi wretch ! 
 i tell thee what- get thee to church a thursday 
 or never after look me in the face . 
 speak not , repli not , do not answer me ! 
 my finger itch . wife , we scarc thought us blest 
 that god had lent us but thi onli child ; 
 but now i see thi one is one too much , 
 and that we have a curs in have her . 
 out on her , hild ! 
 nurs . god in heaven bless her ! 
 you are to blame , my lord , to rate her so . 
 cap . and whi , my ladi wisdom ? hold your tongu , 
 good prudenc . smatter with your gossip , go ! 
 nurs . i speak no treason . 
 cap . o , god-i-god-en ! 
 nurs . may not one speak ? 
 cap . peac , you mumbl fool ! 
 utter your graviti o'er a gossip 's bowl , 
 for here we need it not . 
 ladi . you are too hot . 
 cap . god 's bread i it make me mad . day , night , late , earli , 
 at home , abroad , alon , in compani , 
 wake or sleep , still my care hath been 
 to have her match 'd ; and have now provid 
 a gentleman of princ parentag , 
 of fair demesn , youth , and nobli train 'd , 
 stuff 'd , as they say , with honour part , 
 proport 'd as one 's thought would wish a man- 
 and then to have a wretch pule fool , 
 a whine mammet , in her fortun 's tender , 
 to answer ' i 'll not wed , i can not love ; 
 i am too young , i pray you pardon me ' ! 
 but , an you will not wed , i 'll pardon you . 
 graze where you will , you shall not hous with me . 
 look to't , think o n't ; i do not use to jest . 
 thursday is near ; lay hand on heart , advis : 
 an you be mine , i 'll give you to my friend ; 
 an you be not , hang , beg , starv , die in the street , 
 for , by my soul , i 'll ne'er acknowledg thee , 
 nor what is mine shall never do thee good . 
 trust to't . bethink you . i 'll not be forsworn . exit . 
 jul . is there no piti sit in the cloud 
 that see into the bottom of my grief ? 
 o sweet my mother , cast me not away ! 
 delay thi marriag for a month , a week ; 
 or if you do not , make the bridal bed 
 in that dim monument where tybalt lie . 
 ladi . talk not to me , for i 'll not speak a word . 
 do as thou wilt , for i have done with thee . exit . 
 jul . o god ! - o nurs , how shall thi be prevent ? 
 my husband is on earth , my faith in heaven . 
 how shall that faith return again to earth 
 unless that husband send it me from heaven 
 by leav earth ? comfort me , counsel me . 
 alack , alack , that heaven should practis stratagem 
 upon so soft a subject as myself ! 
 what say'st thou ? hast thou not a word of joy ? 
 some comfort , nurs . 
 nurs . faith , here it is . 
 romeo is banish 'd ; and all the world to noth 
 that he dare ne'er come back to challeng you ; 
 or if he do , it need must be by stealth . 
 then , sinc the case so stand as now it doth , 
 i think it best you marri with the counti . 
 o , he 's a love gentleman ! 
 romeo 's a dishclout to him . an eagl , madam , 
 hath not so green , so quick , so fair an eye 
 as pari hath . beshrew my veri heart , 
 i think you are happi in thi second match , 
 for it excel your first ; or if it did not , 
 your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were 
 as live here and you no use of him . 
 jul . speak'st thou thi from thi heart ? 
 nurs . and from my soul too ; els beshrew them both . 
 jul . amen ! 
 nurs . what ? 
 jul . well , thou hast comfort me marvel much . 
 go in ; and tell my ladi i am gone , 
 have displea 'd my father , to laurenc ' cell , 
 to make confess and to be absolv 'd . 
 nurs . marri , i will ; and thi is wise done . exit . 
 jul . ancient damnat ! o most wick fiend ! 
 is it more sin to wish me thu forsworn , 
 or to disprais my lord with that same tongu 
 which she hath prai 'd him with abov compar 
 so mani thousand time ? go , counsellor ! 
 thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain . 
 i 'll to the friar to know hi remedi . 
 if all els fail , myself have power to die . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 friar laurenc 's cell . 
 
 enter friar , [ laurenc ] and counti pari . 
 
 friar . on thursday , sir ? the time is veri short . 
 par . my father capulet will have it so , 
 and i am noth slow to slack hi hast . 
 friar . you say you do not know the ladi 's mind . 
 uneven is the cours ; i like it not . 
 par . immoder she weep for tybalt 's death , 
 and therefor have i littl talk 'd of love ; 
 for venu smile not in a hous of tear . 
 now , sir , her father count it danger 
 that she do give her sorrow so much sway , 
 and in hi wisdom hast our marriag 
 to stop the inund of her tear , 
 which , too much mind by herself alon , 
 may be put from her by societi . 
 now do you know the reason of thi hast . 
 friar . [ asid ] i would i knew not whi it should be slow'd.- 
 look , sir , here come the ladi toward my cell . 
 
 enter juliet . 
 
 par . happili met , my ladi and my wife ! 
 jul . that may be , sir , when i may be a wife . 
 par . that may be must be , love , on thursday next . 
 jul . what must be shall be . 
 friar . that 's a certain text . 
 par . come you to make confess to thi father ? 
 jul . to answer that , i should confess to you . 
 par . do not deni to him that you love me . 
 jul . i will confess to you that i love him . 
 par . so will ye , i am sure , that you love me . 
 jul . if i do so , it will be of more price , 
 be spoke behind your back , than to your face . 
 par . poor soul , thi face is much abu 'd with tear . 
 jul . the tear have got small victori by that , 
 for it wa bad enough befor their spite . 
 par . thou wrong'st it more than tear with that report . 
 jul . that is no slander , sir , which is a truth ; 
 and what i spake , i spake it to my face . 
 par . thi face is mine , and thou hast sland'r it . 
 jul . it may be so , for it is not mine own . 
 are you at leisur , holi father , now , 
 or shall i come to you at even mass 
 friar . my leisur serv me , pensiv daughter , now . 
 my lord , we must entreat the time alon . 
 par . god shield i should disturb devot ! 
 juliet , on thursday earli will i rous ye . 
 till then , adieu , and keep thi holi kiss . exit . 
 jul . o , shut the door ! and when thou hast done so , 
 come weep with me- past hope , past cure , past help ! 
 friar . ah , juliet , i alreadi know thi grief ; 
 it strain me past the compass of my wit . 
 i hear thou must , and noth may prorogu it , 
 on thursday next be marri to thi counti . 
 jul . tell me not , friar , that thou hear'st of thi , 
 unless thou tell me how i may prevent it . 
 if in thi wisdom thou canst give no help , 
 do thou but call my resolut wise 
 and with thi knife i 'll help it present . 
 god join 'd my heart and romeo 's , thou our hand ; 
 and ere thi hand , by thee to romeo 's seal 'd , 
 shall be the label to anoth deed , 
 or my true heart with treacher revolt 
 turn to anoth , thi shall slay them both . 
 therefor , out of thi long-experienc 'd time , 
 give me some present counsel ; or , behold , 
 'twixt my extrem and me thi bloodi knife 
 shall play the empir , arbitr that 
 which the commiss of thi year and art 
 could to no issu of true honour bring . 
 be not so long to speak . i long to die 
 if what thou speak'st speak not of remedi . 
 friar . hold , daughter . i do spi a kind of hope , 
 which crave as desper an execut 
 as that is desper which we would prevent . 
 if , rather than to marri counti pari 
 thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself , 
 then is it like thou wilt undertak 
 a thing like death to chide away thi shame , 
 that cop'st with death himself to scape from it ; 
 and , if thou dar'st , i 'll give thee remedi . 
 jul . o , bid me leap , rather than marri pari , 
 from off the battlement of yonder tower , 
 or walk in thievish way , or bid me lurk 
 where serpent are ; chain me with roar bear , 
 or shut me nightli in a charnel hous , 
 o'ercov 'd quit with dead men 's rattl bone , 
 with reeki shank and yellow chapless skull ; 
 or bid me go into a new-mad grave 
 and hide me with a dead man in hi shroud- 
 thing that , to hear them told , have made me tremble- 
 and i will do it without fear or doubt , 
 to live an unstain 'd wife to my sweet love . 
 friar . hold , then . go home , be merri , give consent 
 to marri pari . wednesday is to-morrow . 
 to-morrow night look that thou lie alon ; 
 let not the nurs lie with thee in thi chamber . 
 take thou thi vial , be then in bed , 
 and thi distil liquor drink thou off ; 
 when present through all thi vein shall run 
 a cold and drowsi humour ; for no puls 
 shall keep hi nativ progress , but surceas ; 
 no warmth , no breath , shall testifi thou livest ; 
 the rose in thi lip and cheek shall fade 
 to pali ash , thi eye ' window fall 
 like death when he shut up the day of life ; 
 each part , depriv 'd of suppl govern , 
 shall , stiff and stark and cold , appear like death ; 
 and in thi borrow like of shrunk death 
 thou shalt continu two-and-forti hour , 
 and then awak as from a pleasant sleep . 
 now , when the bridegroom in the morn come 
 to rous thee from thi bed , there art thou dead . 
 then , as the manner of our countri is , 
 in thi best robe uncov on the bier 
 thou shalt be born to that same ancient vault 
 where all the kindr of the capulet lie . 
 in the mean time , against thou shalt awak , 
 shall romeo by my letter know our drift ; 
 and hither shall he come ; and he and i 
 will watch thi wake , and that veri night 
 shall romeo bear thee henc to mantua . 
 and thi shall free thee from thi present shame , 
 if no inconst toy nor womanish fear 
 abat thi valour in the act it . 
 jul . give me , give me ! o , tell not me of fear ! 
 friar . hold ! get you gone , be strong and prosper 
 in thi resolv . i 'll send a friar with speed 
 to mantua , with my letter to thi lord . 
 jul . love give me strength ! and strength shall help afford . 
 farewel , dear father . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 capulet 's hous . 
 
 enter father capulet , mother , nurs , and servingmen , 
 two or three . 
 
 cap . so mani guest invit as here are writ . 
 [ exit a servingman . ] 
 sirrah , go hire me twenti cun cook . 
 serv . you shall have none ill , sir ; for i 'll tri if they can lick 
 their finger . 
 cap . how canst thou tri them so ? 
 serv . marri , sir , 't is an ill cook that can not lick hi own 
 finger . therefor he that can not lick hi finger goe not with 
 me . 
 cap . go , begon . 
 exit servingman . 
 we shall be much unfurnish 'd for thi time . 
 what , is my daughter gone to friar laurenc ? 
 nurs . ay , forsooth . 
 cap . well , be may chanc to do some good on her . 
 a peevish self-wil 'd harlotri it is . 
 
 enter juliet . 
 
 nurs . see where she come from shrift with merri look . 
 cap . how now , my headstrong ? where have you been gad ? 
 jul . where i have learnt me to repent the sin 
 of disobedi opposit 
 to you and your behest , and am enjoin 'd 
 by holi laurenc to fall prostrat here 
 to beg your pardon . pardon , i beseech you ! 
 henceforward i am ever rul 'd by you . 
 cap . send for the counti . go tell him of thi . 
 i 'll have thi knot knit up to-morrow morn . 
 jul . i met the youth lord at laurenc ' cell 
 and gave him what becom love i might , 
 not step o'er the bound of modesti . 
 cap . whi , i am glad o n't . thi is well . stand up . 
 thi is as't should be . let me see the counti . 
 ay , marri , go , i say , and fetch him hither . 
 now , afor god , thi reverend holi friar , 
 all our whole citi is much bound to him . 
 jul . nurs , will you go with me into my closet 
 to help me sort such need ornament 
 as you think fit to furnish me to-morrow ? 
 mother . no , not till thursday . there is time enough . 
 cap . go , nurs , go with her . we 'll to church to-morrow . 
 exeunt juliet and nurs . 
 mother . we shall be short in our provis . 
 't is now near night . 
 cap . tush , i will stir about , 
 and all thing shall be well , i warrant thee , wife . 
 go thou to juliet , help to deck up her . 
 i 'll not to bed to-night ; let me alon . 
 i 'll play the housewif for thi onc . what , ho ! 
 they are all forth ; well , i will walk myself 
 to counti pari , to prepar him up 
 against to-morrow . my heart is wondrou light , 
 sinc thi same wayward girl is so reclaim 'd . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 juliet 's chamber . 
 
 enter juliet and nurs . 
 
 jul . ay , those attir are best ; but , gentl nurs , 
 i pray thee leav me to myself to-night ; 
 for i have need of mani orison 
 to move the heaven to smile upon my state , 
 which , well thou knowest , is cross and full of sin . 
 
 enter mother . 
 
 mother . what , are you busi , ho ? need you my help ? 
 jul . no , madam ; we have cull 'd such necessari 
 as are behoofful for our state to-morrow . 
 so pleas you , let me now be left alon , 
 and let the nurs thi night sit up with you ; 
 for i am sure you have your hand full all 
 in thi so sudden busi . 
 mother . good night . 
 get thee to bed , and rest ; for thou hast need . 
 exeunt [ mother and nurs . ] 
 jul . farewel ! god know when we shall meet again . 
 i have a faint cold fear thrill through my vein 
 that almost freez up the heat of life . 
 i 'll call them back again to comfort me . 
 nurs ! - what should she do here ? 
 my dismal scene i need must act alon . 
 come , vial . 
 what if thi mixtur do not work at all ? 
 shall i be marri then to-morrow morn ? 
 no , no ! thi shall forbid it . lie thou there . 
 lay down a dagger . 
 what if it be a poison which the friar 
 subtilli hath minist'r to have me dead , 
 lest in thi marriag he should be dishonour 'd 
 becaus he marri me befor to romeo ? 
 i fear it is ; and yet methink it should not , 
 for he hath still been tri a holi man . 
 i will not entertain so bad a thought . 
 how if , when i am laid into the tomb , 
 i wake befor the time that romeo 
 come to redeem me ? there 's a fear point ! 
 shall i not then be stifl in the vault , 
 to whose foul mouth no healthsom air breath in , 
 and there die strangl ere my romeo come ? 
 or , if i live , is it not veri like 
 the horribl conceit of death and night , 
 togeth with the terror of the place- 
 as in a vault , an ancient receptacl 
 where for thi mani hundr year the bone 
 of all my buri ancestor are pack 'd ; 
 where bloodi tybalt , yet but green in earth , 
 lie fest'r in hi shroud ; where , as they say , 
 at some hour in the night spirit resort- 
 alack , alack , is it not like that i , 
 so earli waking- what with loathsom smell , 
 and shriek like mandrak torn out of the earth , 
 that live mortal , hear them , run mad- 
 o , if i wake , shall i not be distraught , 
 environ with all these hideou fear , 
 and madli play with my forefath ' joint , 
 and pluck the mangl tybalt from hi shroud. , 
 and , in thi rage , with some great kinsman 's bone 
 as with a club dash out my desp'rat brain ? 
 o , look ! methink i see my cousin 's ghost 
 seek out romeo , that did spit hi bodi 
 upon a rapier 's point . stay , tybalt , stay ! 
 romeo , i come ! thi do i drink to thee . 
 
 she [ drink and ] fall upon her bed within the curtain . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 capulet 's hous . 
 
 enter ladi of the hous and nurs . 
 
 ladi . hold , take these key and fetch more spice , nurs . 
 nurs . they call for date and quinc in the pastri . 
 
 enter old capulet . 
 
 cap . come , stir , stir , stir ! the second cock hath crow 'd , 
 the curfew bell hath rung , 't is three o'clock . 
 look to the bak 'd meat , good angelica ; 
 spare not for cost . 
 nurs . go , you cot-quean , go , 
 get you to bed ! faith , you 'll be sick to-morrow 
 for thi night 's watch . 
 cap . no , not a whit . what , i have watch 'd ere now 
 all night for lesser caus , and ne'er been sick . 
 ladi . ay , you have been a mouse-hunt in your time ; 
 but i will watch you from such watch now . 
 exeunt ladi and nurs . 
 cap . a jealou hood , a jealou hood ! 
 
 enter three or four [ fellow , with spit and log and basket . 
 
 what is there ? now , fellow , 
 fellow . thing for the cook , sir ; but i know not what . 
 cap . make hast , make hast . [ exit fellow . ] sirrah , fetch drier 
 log . 
 call peter ; he will show thee where they are . 
 fellow . i have a head , sir , that will find out log 
 and never troubl peter for the matter . 
 cap . mass , and well said ; a merri whoreson , ha ! 
 thou shalt be loggerhead . [ exit fellow . ] good faith , 't is day . 
 the counti will be here with music straight , 
 for so he said he would . play music . 
 i hear him near . 
 nurs ! wife ! what , ho ! what , nurs , i say ! 
 
 enter nurs . 
 go waken juliet ; go and trim her up . 
 i 'll go and chat with pari . hie , make hast , 
 make hast ! the bridegroom he is come alreadi : 
 make hast , i say . 
 [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 juliet 's chamber . 
 
 [ enter nurs . ] 
 
 nurs . mistress ! what , mistress ! juliet ! fast , i warrant her , she . 
 whi , lamb ! whi , ladi ! fie , you slug-ab ! 
 whi , love , i say ! madam ! sweetheart ! whi , bride ! 
 what , not a word ? you take your pennyworth now ! 
 sleep for a week ; for the next night , i warrant , 
 the counti pari hath set up hi rest 
 that you shall rest but littl . god forgiv me ! 
 marri , and amen . how sound is she asleep ! 
 i need must wake her . madam , madam , madam ! 
 ay , let the counti take you in your bed ! 
 he 'll fright you up , i ' faith . will it not be ? 
 [ draw asid the curtain . ] 
 what , dress 'd , and in your cloth , and down again ? 
 i must need wake you . ladi ! ladi ! ladi ! 
 ala , ala ! help , help ! my ladi 's dead ! 
 o weraday that ever i wa born ! 
 some aqua-vita , ho ! my lord ! my ladi ! 
 
 enter mother . 
 
 mother . what nois is here ? 
 nurs . o lament day ! 
 mother . what is the matter ? 
 nurs . look , look ! o heavi day ! 
 mother . o me , o me ! my child , my onli life ! 
 reviv , look up , or i will die with thee ! 
 help , help ! call help . 
 
 enter father . 
 
 father . for shame , bring juliet forth ; her lord is come . 
 nurs . she 's dead , decea 'd ; she 's dead ! alack the day ! 
 mother . alack the day , she 's dead , she 's dead , she 's dead ! 
 cap . ha ! let me see her . out ala ! she 's cold , 
 her blood is settl , and her joint are stiff ; 
 life and these lip have long been separ . 
 death lie on her like an untim frost 
 upon the sweetest flower of all the field . 
 nurs . o lament day ! 
 mother . o woful time ! 
 cap . death , that hath ta'en her henc to make me wail , 
 tie up my tongu and will not let me speak . 
 
 enter friar [ laurenc ] and the counti [ pari ] , with musician . 
 
 friar . come , is the bride readi to go to church ? 
 cap . readi to go , but never to return . 
 o son , the night befor thi wed day 
 hath death lain with thi wife . see , there she lie , 
 flower as she wa , deflow by him . 
 death is my son-in-law , death is my heir ; 
 my daughter he hath wed . i will die 
 and leav him all . life , live , all is death 's . 
 par . have i thought long to see thi morn 's face , 
 and doth it give me such a sight as thi ? 
 mother . accur 'd , unhappi , wretch , hate day ! 
 most miser hour that e'er time saw 
 in last labour of hi pilgrimag ! 
 but one , poor one , one poor and love child , 
 but one thing to rejoic and solac in , 
 and cruel death hath catch 'd it from my sight ! 
 nurs . o woe ? o woful , woful , woful day ! 
 most lament day , most woful day 
 that ever ever i did yet behold ! 
 o day ! o day ! o day ! o hate day ! 
 never wa seen so black a day as thi . 
 o woful day ! o woful day ! 
 par . beguil 'd , divorc , wrong , spite , slain ! 
 most detest death , by thee beguil 'd , 
 by cruel cruel thee quit overthrown ! 
 o love ! o life ! not life , but love in death 
 cap . despi 'd , distress , hate , martyr 'd , kill 'd ! 
 uncomfort time , whi cam'st thou now 
 to murther , murther our solemn ? 
 o child ! o child ! my soul , and not my child ! 
 dead art thou , dead ! alack , my child is dead , 
 and with my child my joy are buri ! 
 friar . peac , ho , for shame ! confus 's cure live not 
 in these confus . heaven and yourself 
 had part in thi fair maid ! now heaven hath all , 
 and all the better is it for the maid . 
 your part in her you could not keep from death , 
 but heaven keep hi part in etern life . 
 the most you sought wa her promot , 
 for 't wa your heaven she should be advanc 'd ; 
 and weep ye now , see she is advanc 'd 
 abov the cloud , as high as heaven itself ? 
 o , in thi love , you love your child so ill 
 that you run mad , see that she is well . 
 she 's not well marri that live marri long , 
 but she 's best marri that die marri young . 
 dri up your tear and stick your rosemari 
 on thi fair cors , and , as the custom is , 
 in all her best array bear her to church ; 
 for though fond natur bid us all lament , 
 yet natur 's tear are reason 's merriment . 
 cap . all thing that we ordain festiv 
 turn from their offic to black funeral- 
 our instrument to melancholi bell , 
 our wed cheer to a sad burial feast ; 
 our solemn hymn to sullen dirg chang ; 
 our bridal flower serv for a buri cors ; 
 and all thing chang them to the contrari . 
 friar . sir , go you in ; and , madam , go with him ; 
 and go , sir pari . everi one prepar 
 to follow thi fair cors unto her grave . 
 the heaven do low ' r upon you for some ill ; 
 move them no more by cross their high will . 
 exeunt . manent musician [ and nurs ] . 
 < num > . mu . faith , we may put up our pipe and be gone . 
 nurs . honest good fellow , ah , put up , put up ! 
 for well you know thi is a piti case . [ exit . ] 
 < num > . mu . ay , by my troth , the case may be amend . 
 
 enter peter . 
 
 pet . musician , o , musician , 'heart 's eas , ' 'heart 's eas ' ! 
 o , an you will have me live , play 'heart 's eas . ' 
 < num > . mu . whi 'heart 's eas '' , 
 pet . o , musician , becaus my heart itself play 'mi heart is full 
 of woe . ' o , play me some merri dump to comfort me . 
 < num > . mu . not a dump we ! 't is no time to play now . 
 pet . you will not then ? 
 < num > . mu . no . 
 pet . i will then give it you soundli . 
 < num > . mu . what will you give us ? 
 pet . no money , on my faith , but the gleek . i will give you the 
 minstrel . 
 < num > . mu . then will i give you the serving-creatur . 
 pet . then will i lay the serving-creatur 's dagger on your pate . 
 i will carri no crotchet . i 'll re you , i 'll fa you . do you note 
 me ? 
 < num > . mu . an you re us and fa us , you note us . 
 < num > . mu . pray you put up your dagger , and put out your wit . 
 pet . then have at you with my wit ! i will dry-beat you with an iron 
 wit , and put up my iron dagger . answer me like men . 
 
 'when gripe grief the heart doth wound , 
 and dole dump the mind oppress , 
 then music with her silver sound'- 
 
 whi 'silver sound ' ? whi 'music with her silver sound ' ? 
 what say you , simon catl ? 
 < num > . mu . marri , sir , becaus silver hath a sweet sound . 
 pet . pretti ! what say you , hugh rebeck ? 
 < num > . mu . i say 'silver sound ' becaus musician sound for silver . 
 pet . pretti too ! what say you , jame soundpost ? 
 < num > . mu . faith , i know not what to say . 
 pet . o , i cri you merci ! you are the singer . i will say for you . it 
 is 'music with her silver sound ' becaus musician have no gold 
 for sound . 
 
 'then music with her silver sound 
 with speedi help doth lend redress . ' [ exit . 
 
 < num > . mu . what a pestil knave is thi same ? 
 < num > . mu . hang him , jack ! come , we 'll in here , tarri for the 
 mourner , and stay dinner . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 mantua . a street . 
 
 enter romeo . 
 
 rom . if i may trust the flatter truth of sleep 
 my dream presag some joy news at hand . 
 my bosom 's lord sit lightli in hi throne , 
 and all thi day an unaccustom 'd spirit 
 lift me abov the ground with cheer thought . 
 i dreamt my ladi came and found me dead 
 ( strang dream that give a dead man leav to think ! ) 
 and breath 'd such life with kiss in my lip 
 that i reviv 'd and wa an emperor . 
 ah me ! how sweet is love itself possess 'd , 
 when but love 's shadow are so rich in joy ! 
 
 enter romeo 's man balthasar , boot . 
 
 news from verona ! how now , balthasar ? 
 dost thou not bring me letter from the friar ? 
 how doth my ladi ? is my father well ? 
 how fare my juliet ? that i ask again , 
 for noth can be ill if she be well . 
 man . then she is well , and noth can be ill. 
 her bodi sleep in capel 's monument , 
 and her immort part with angel live . 
 i saw her laid low in her kindr 's vault 
 and present took post to tell it you . 
 o , pardon me for bring these ill news , 
 sinc you did leav it for my offic , sir . 
 rom . is it e'en so ? then i defi you , star ! 
 thou knowest my lodg . get me ink and paper 
 and hire posthors . i will henc to-night . 
 man . i do beseech you , sir , have patienc . 
 your look are pale and wild and do import 
 some misadventur . 
 rom . tush , thou art deceiv 'd . 
 leav me and do the thing i bid thee do . 
 hast thou no letter to me from the friar ? 
 man . no , my good lord . 
 rom . no matter . get thee gone 
 and hire those hors . i 'll be with thee straight . 
 exit [ balthasar ] . 
 well , juliet , i will lie with thee to-night . 
 let 's see for mean . o mischief , thou art swift 
 to enter in the thought of desper men ! 
 i do rememb an apothecari , 
 and hereabout ' a dwell , which late i note 
 in tatt'r weed , with overwhelm brow , 
 cull of simpl . meagr were hi look , 
 sharp miseri had worn him to the bone ; 
 and in hi needi shop a tortois hung , 
 an allig stuff 'd , and other skin 
 of ill-shap fish ; and about hi shelv 
 a beggarli account of empti box , 
 green earthen pot , bladder , and musti seed , 
 remnant of packthread , and old cake of rose 
 were thinli scatter , to make up a show . 
 note thi penuri , to myself i said , 
 'an if a man did need a poison now 
 whose sale is present death in mantua , 
 here live a caitiff wretch would sell it him . ' 
 o , thi same thought did but forerun my need , 
 and thi same needi man must sell it me . 
 as i rememb , thi should be the hous . 
 be holiday , the beggar 's shop is shut . what , ho ! apothecari ! 
 
 enter apothecari . 
 
 apoth . who call so loud ? 
 rom . come hither , man . i see that thou art poor . 
 hold , there is forti ducat . let me have 
 a dram of poison , such soon-speed gear 
 as will dispers itself through all the vein 
 that the life-weari taker mall fall dead , 
 and that the trunk may be discharg 'd of breath 
 as violent as hasti powder fir 'd 
 doth hurri from the fatal cannon 's womb . 
 apoth . such mortal drug i have ; but mantua 's law 
 is death to ani he that utter them . 
 rom . art thou so bare and full of wretched 
 and fearest to die ? famin is in thi cheek , 
 need and oppress starveth in thine eye , 
 contempt and beggari hang upon thi back : 
 the world is not thi friend , nor the world 's law ; 
 the world afford no law to make thee rich ; 
 then be not poor , but break it and take thi . 
 apoth . my poverti but not my will consent . 
 rom . i pay thi poverti and not thi will . 
 apoth . put thi in ani liquid thing you will 
 and drink it off , and if you had the strength 
 of twenti men , it would dispatch you straight . 
 rom . there is thi gold- wors poison to men 's soul , 
 do more murther in thi loathsom world , 
 than these poor compound that thou mayst not sell . 
 i sell thee poison ; thou hast sold me none . 
 farewel . buy food and get thyself in flesh . 
 come , cordial and not poison , go with me 
 to juliet 's grave ; for there must i use thee . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 verona . friar laurenc 's cell . 
 
 enter friar john to friar laurenc . 
 
 john . holi franciscan friar , brother , ho ! 
 
 enter friar laurenc . 
 
 laur . thi same should be the voic of friar john . 
 welcom from mantua . what say romeo ? 
 or , if hi mind be writ , give me hi letter . 
 john . go to find a barefoot brother out , 
 one of our order , to associ me 
 here in thi citi visit the sick , 
 and find him , the searcher of the town , 
 suspect that we both were in a hous 
 where the infecti pestil did reign , 
 seal 'd up the door , and would not let us forth , 
 so that my speed to mantua there wa stay 'd . 
 laur . who bare my letter , then , to romeo ? 
 john . i could not send it- here it is again- 
 nor get a messeng to bring it thee , 
 so fear were they of infect . 
 laur . unhappi fortun ! by my brotherhood , 
 the letter wa not nice , but full of charg , 
 of dear import ; and the neglect it 
 may do much danger . friar john , go henc , 
 get me an iron crow and bring it straight 
 unto my cell . 
 john . brother , i 'll go and bring it thee . exit . 
 laur . now , must i to the monument alon . 
 within thi three hour will fair juliet wake . 
 she will beshrew me much that romeo 
 hath had no notic of these accid ; 
 but i will write again to mantua , 
 and keep her at my cell till romeo come- 
 poor live cors , clo 'd in a dead man 's tomb ! exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 verona . a churchyard ; in it the monument of the capulet . 
 
 enter pari and hi page with flower and [ a torch ] . 
 
 par . give me thi torch , boy . henc , and stand aloof . 
 yet put it out , for i would not be seen . 
 under yond yew tree lay thee all along , 
 hold thine ear close to the hollow ground . 
 so shall no foot upon the churchyard tread 
 ( be loos , unfirm , with dig up of grave ) 
 but thou shalt hear it . whistl then to me , 
 as signal that thou hear'st someth approach . 
 give me those flower . do as i bid thee , go . 
 page . [ asid ] i am almost afraid to stand alon 
 here in the churchyard ; yet i will adventur . [ retir . ] 
 par . sweet flower , with flower thi bridal bed i strew 
 ( o woe ! thi canopi is dust and stone ) 
 which with sweet water nightli i will dew ; 
 or , want that , with tear distil 'd by moan . 
 the obsequi that i for thee will keep 
 nightli shall be to strew , thi grave and weep . 
 whistl boy . 
 the boy give warn someth doth approach . 
 what curs foot wander thi way to-night 
 to cross my obsequi and true love 's rite ? 
 what , with a torch ? muffl me , night , awhil . [ retir . ] 
 
 enter romeo , and balthasar with a torch , a mattock , 
 and a crow of iron . 
 
 rom . give me that mattock and the wrench iron . 
 hold , take thi letter . earli in the morn 
 see thou deliv it to my lord and father . 
 give me the light . upon thi life i charg thee , 
 whate' thou hearest or seest , stand all aloof 
 and do not interrupt me in my cours . 
 whi i descend into thi bed of death 
 is partli to behold my ladi 's face , 
 but chiefli to take thenc from her dead finger 
 a preciou ring- a ring that i must use 
 in dear employ . therefor henc , be gone . 
 but if thou , jealou , dost return to pri 
 in what i farther shall intend to do , 
 by heaven , i will tear thee joint by joint 
 and strew thi hungri churchyard with thi limb . 
 the time and my intent are savage-wild , 
 more fierc and more inexor far 
 than empti tiger or the roar sea . 
 bal . i will be gone , sir , and not troubl you . 
 rom . so shalt thou show me friendship . take thou that . 
 live , and be prosper ; and farewel , good fellow . 
 bal . [ asid ] for all thi same , i 'll hide me hereabout . 
 hi look i fear , and hi intent i doubt . [ retir . ] 
 rom . thou detest maw , thou womb of death , 
 gorg 'd with the dearest morsel of the earth , 
 thu i enforc thi rotten jaw to open , 
 and in despit i 'll cram thee with more food . 
 romeo open the tomb . 
 par . thi is that banish 'd haughti montagu 
 that murd'r my love 's cousin- with which grief 
 it is suppos the fair creatur died- 
 and here is come to do some villan shame 
 to the dead bodi . i will apprehend him . 
 stop thi unhallow toil , vile montagu ! 
 can vengeanc be pursu 'd further than death ? 
 condemn villain , i do apprehend thee . 
 obey , and go with me ; for thou must die . 
 rom . i must inde ; and therefor came i hither . 
 good gentl youth , tempt not a desp'rat man . 
 fli henc and leav me . think upon these gone ; 
 let them affright thee . i beseech thee , youth , 
 but not anoth sin upon my head 
 by urg me to furi . o , be gone ! 
 by heaven , i love thee better than myself , 
 for i come hither arm 'd against myself . 
 stay not , be gone . live , and hereaft say 
 a madman 's merci bid thee run away . 
 par . i do defi thi , conjur 
 and apprehend thee for a felon here . 
 rom . wilt thou provok me ? then have at thee , boy ! 
 they fight . 
 page . o lord , they fight ! i will go call the watch . 
 [ exit . pari fall . ] 
 par . o , i am slain ! if thou be merci , 
 open the tomb , lay me with juliet . [ die . ] 
 rom . in faith , i will . let me perus thi face . 
 mercutio 's kinsman , nobl counti pari ! 
 what said my man when my betoss soul 
 did not attend him as we rode ? i think 
 he told me pari should have marri juliet . 
 said he not so ? or did i dream it so ? 
 or am i mad , hear him talk of juliet 
 to think it wa so ? o , give me thi hand , 
 one writ with me in sour misfortun 's book ! 
 i 'll buri thee in a triumphant grave . 
 a grave ? o , no , a lanthorn , slaught'r youth , 
 for here lie juliet , and her beauti make 
 thi vault a feast presenc full of light . 
 death , lie thou there , by a dead man interr 'd . 
 [ lay him in the tomb . ] 
 how oft when men are at the point of death 
 have they been merri ! which their keeper call 
 a lightn befor death . o , how may i 
 call thi a lightn ? o my love ! my wife ! 
 death , that hath suck 'd the honey of thi breath , 
 hath had no power yet upon thi beauti . 
 thou art not conquer 'd . beauti 's ensign yet 
 is crimson in thi lip and in thi cheek , 
 and death 's pale flag is not advanc there . 
 tybalt , liest thou there in thi bloodi sheet ? 
 o , what more favour can i do to thee 
 than with that hand that cut thi youth in twain 
 to sunder hi that wa thine enemi ? 
 forgiv me , cousin . ' ah , dear juliet , 
 whi art thou yet so fair ? shall i believ 
 that unsubstanti death is amor , 
 and that the lean abhor monster keep 
 thee here in dark to be hi paramour ? 
 for fear of that i still will stay with thee 
 and never from thi palac of dim night 
 depart again . here , here will i remain 
 with worm that are thi chambermaid . o , here 
 will i set up my everlast rest 
 and shake the yoke of inauspici star 
 from thi world-weari flesh . eye , look your last ! 
 arm , take your last embrac ! and , lip , o you 
 the door of breath , seal with a righteou kiss 
 a dateless bargain to engross death ! 
 come , bitter conduct ; come , unsavouri guid ! 
 thou desper pilot , now at onc run on 
 the dash rock thi seasick weari bark ! 
 here 's to my love ! [ drink . ] o true apothecari ! 
 thi drug are quick . thu with a kiss i die . fall . 
 
 enter friar [ laurenc ] , with lanthorn , crow , and spade . 
 
 friar . saint franci be my speed ! how oft to-night 
 have my old feet stumbl at grave ! who 's there ? 
 bal . here 's one , a friend , and one that know you well . 
 friar . bliss be upon you ! tell me , good my friend , 
 what torch is yond that vainli lend hi light 
 to grub and eyeless skull ? as i discern , 
 it burneth in the capel ' monument . 
 bal . it doth so , holi sir ; and there 's my master , 
 one that you love . 
 friar . who is it ? 
 bal . romeo . 
 friar . how long hath he been there ? 
 bal . full half an hour . 
 friar . go with me to the vault . 
 bal . i dare not , sir . 
 my master know not but i am gone henc , 
 and fear did menac me with death 
 if i did stay to look on hi intent . 
 friar . stay then ; i 'll go alon . fear come upon me . 
 o , much i fear some ill unthrifti thing . 
 bal . as i did sleep under thi yew tree here , 
 i dreamt my master and anoth fought , 
 and that my master slew him . 
 friar . romeo ! 
 alack , alack , what blood is thi which stain 
 the stoni entranc of thi sepulchr ? 
 what mean these masterless and gori sword 
 to lie discolour 'd by thi place of peac ? [ enter the tomb . ] 
 romeo ! o , pale ! who els ? what , pari too ? 
 and steep 'd in blood ? ah , what an unkind hour 
 is guilti of thi lament chanc ! the ladi stir . 
 juliet rise . 
 jul . o comfort friar ! where is my lord ? 
 i do rememb well where i should be , 
 and there i am . where is my romeo ? 
 friar . i hear some nois . ladi , come from that nest 
 of death , contagion , and unnatur sleep . 
 a greater power than we can contradict 
 hath thwart our intent . come , come away . 
 thi husband in thi bosom there lie dead ; 
 and pari too . come , i 'll dispos of thee 
 among a sisterhood of holi nun . 
 stay not to question , for the watch is come . 
 come , go , good juliet . i dare no longer stay . 
 jul . go , get thee henc , for i will not away . 
 exit [ friar ] . 
 what 's here ? a cup , clo 'd in my true love 's hand ? 
 poison , i see , hath been hi timeless end . 
 o churl ! drunk all , and left no friendli drop 
 to help me after ? i will kiss thi lip . 
 hapli some poison yet doth hang on them 
 to make me die with a restor . [ kiss him . ] 
 thi lip are warm ! 
 chief watch . [ within ] lead , boy . which way ? 
 yea , nois ? then i 'll be brief . o happi dagger ! 
 [ snatch romeo 's dagger . ] 
 thi is thi sheath ; there rest , and let me die . 
 she stab herself and fall [ on romeo 's bodi ] . 
 
 enter [ pari 's ] boy and watch . 
 
 boy . thi is the place . there , where the torch doth burn . 
 chief watch . 'the ground is bloodi . search about the churchyard . 
 go , some of you ; whoe'er you find attach . 
 [ exeunt some of the watch . ] 
 piti sight ! here lie the counti slain ; 
 and juliet bleed , warm , and newli dead , 
 who here hath lain thi two day buri . 
 go , tell the princ ; run to the capulet ; 
 rais up the montagu ; some other search . 
 [ exeunt other of the watch . ] 
 we see the ground whereon these woe do lie , 
 but the true ground of all these piteou woe 
 we can not without circumst descri . 
 
 enter [ some of the watch , ] with romeo 's man [ balthasar ] . 
 
 < num > . watch . here 's romeo 's man . we found him in the churchyard . 
 chief watch . hold him in safeti till the princ come hither . 
 
 enter friar [ laurenc ] and anoth watchman . 
 
 < num > . watch . here is a friar that trembl , sigh , and weep . 
 we took thi mattock and thi spade from him 
 as he wa come from thi churchyard side . 
 chief watch . a great suspicion ! stay the friar too . 
 
 enter the princ [ and attend ] . 
 
 princ . what misadventur is so earli up , 
 that call our person from our morn rest ? 
 
 enter capulet and hi wife [ with other ] . 
 
 cap . what should it be , that they so shriek abroad ? 
 wife . the peopl in the street cri 'romeo , ' 
 some 'juliet , ' and some 'pari ' ; and all run , 
 with open outcri , toward our monument . 
 princ . what fear is thi which startl in our ear ? 
 chief watch . sovereign , here lie the counti pari slain ; 
 and romeo dead ; and juliet , dead befor , 
 warm and new kill 'd . 
 princ . search , seek , and know how thi foul murder come . 
 chief watch . here is a friar , and slaughter 'd romeo 's man , 
 with instrument upon them fit to open 
 these dead men 's tomb . 
 cap . o heaven ! o wife , look how our daughter bleed ! 
 thi dagger hath mista'en , for , lo , hi hous 
 is empti on the back of montagu , 
 and it missheath in my daughter 's bosom ! 
 wife . o me ! thi sight of death is as a bell 
 that warn my old age to a sepulchr . 
 
 enter montagu [ and other ] . 
 
 princ . come , montagu ; for thou art earli up 
 to see thi son and heir more earli down . 
 mon . ala , my lieg , my wife is dead to-night ! 
 grief of my son 's exil hath stopp 'd her breath . 
 what further woe conspir against mine age ? 
 princ . look , and thou shalt see . 
 mon . o thou untaught ! what manner is in thi , 
 to press befor thi father to a grave ? 
 princ . seal up the mouth of outrag for a while , 
 till we can clear these ambigu 
 and know their spring , their head , their true descent ; 
 and then will i be gener of your woe 
 and lead you even to death . meantim forbear , 
 and let mischanc be slave to patienc . 
 bring forth the parti of suspicion . 
 friar . i am the greatest , abl to do least , 
 yet most suspect , as the time and place 
 doth make against me , of thi dire murther ; 
 and here i stand , both to impeach and purg 
 myself condemn and myself excu 'd . 
 princ . then say it onc what thou dost know in thi . 
 friar . i will be brief , for my short date of breath 
 is not so long as is a tediou tale . 
 romeo , there dead , wa husband to that juliet ; 
 and she , there dead , that romeo 's faith wife . 
 i marri them ; and their stol'n marriag day 
 wa tybalt 's doomsday , whose untim death 
 banish 'd the new-mad bridegroom from thi citi ; 
 for whom , and not for tybalt , juliet pin 'd . 
 you , to remov that sieg of grief from her , 
 betroth 'd and would have marri her perforc 
 to counti pari . then come she to me 
 and with wild look bid me devis some mean 
 to rid her from thi second marriag , 
 or in my cell there would she kill herself . 
 then gave i her ( so tutor by my art ) 
 a sleep potion ; which so took effect 
 as i intend , for it wrought on her 
 the form of death . meantim i writ to romeo 
 that he should hither come as thi dire night 
 to help to take her from her borrow grave , 
 be the time the potion 's forc should ceas . 
 but he which bore my letter , friar john , 
 wa stay 'd by accid , and yesternight 
 return 'd my letter back . then all alon 
 at the prefix hour of her wake 
 came i to take her from her kindr 's vault ; 
 mean to keep her close at my cell 
 till i conveni could send to romeo . 
 but when i came , some minut ere the time 
 of her awak , here untim lay 
 the nobl pari and true romeo dead . 
 she wake ; and i entreat her come forth 
 and bear thi work of heaven with patienc ; 
 but then a nois did scare me from the tomb , 
 and she , too desper , would not go with me , 
 but , as it seem , did violenc on herself . 
 all thi i know , and to the marriag 
 her nurs is privi ; and if aught in thi 
 miscarri by my fault , let my old life 
 be sacrif 'd , some hour befor hi time , 
 unto the rigour of severest law . 
 princ . we still have known thee for a holi man . 
 where 's romeo 's man ? what can he say in thi ? 
 bal . i brought my master news of juliet 's death ; 
 and then in post he came from mantua 
 to thi same place , to thi same monument . 
 thi letter he earli bid me give hi father , 
 and threat'n me with death , go in the vault , 
 if i depart not and left him there . 
 princ . give me the letter . i will look on it . 
 where is the counti 's page that rai 'd the watch ? 
 sirrah , what made your master in thi place ? 
 boy . he came with flower to strew hi ladi 's grave ; 
 and bid me stand aloof , and so i did . 
 anon come one with light to ope the tomb ; 
 and by-and-bi my master drew on him ; 
 and then i ran away to call the watch . 
 princ . thi letter doth make good the friar 's word , 
 their cours of love , the tide of her death ; 
 and here he write that he did buy a poison 
 of a poor pothecari , and therewith 
 came to thi vault to die , and lie with juliet . 
 where be these enemi ? capulet , montag , 
 see what a scourg is laid upon your hate , 
 that heaven find mean to kill your joy with love ! 
 and i , for wink at you , discord too , 
 have lost a brace of kinsmen . all are punish 'd . 
 cap . o brother montagu , give me thi hand . 
 thi is my daughter 's jointur , for no more 
 can i demand . 
 mon . but i can give thee more ; 
 for i will rais her statu in pure gold , 
 that while verona by that name is known , 
 there shall no figur at such rate be set 
 as that of true and faith juliet . 
 cap . as rich shall romeo 's by hi ladi 's lie- 
 poor sacrific of our enmiti ! 
 princ . a gloom peac thi morn with it bring . 
 the sun for sorrow will not show hi head . 
 go henc , to have more talk of these sad thing ; 
 some shall be pardon 'd , and some punish ; 
 for never wa a stori of more woe 
 than thi of juliet and her romeo . 
 exeunt omn . 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 
 
 
 the tame of the shrew 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 lear , king of britain . 
 king of franc . 
 duke of burgundi . 
 duke of cornwal . 
 duke of albani . 
 earl of kent . 
 earl of gloucest . 
 edgar , son of gloucest . 
 edmund , bastard son to gloucest . 
 curan , a courtier . 
 old man , tenant to gloucest . 
 doctor . 
 lear 's fool . 
 oswald , steward to goneril . 
 a captain under edmund 's command . 
 gentlemen . 
 a herald . 
 servant to cornwal . 
 
 goneril , daughter to lear . 
 regan , daughter to lear . 
 cordelia , daughter to lear . 
 
 knight attend on lear , offic , messeng , soldier , 
 attend . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : - britain . 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 [ king lear 's palac . ] 
 
 enter kent , gloucest , and edmund . [ kent and gloucest convers . 
 edmund stand back . ] 
 
 kent . i thought the king had more affect the duke of albani than 
 cornwal . 
 glou . it did alway seem so to us ; but now , in the divis of the 
 kingdom , it appear not which of the duke he valu most , for 
 equal are so weigh 'd that curios in neither can make 
 choic of either 's moieti . 
 kent . is not thi your son , my lord ? 
 glou . hi breed , sir , hath been at my charg . i have so often 
 blush 'd to acknowledg him that now i am braz 'd to't . 
 kent . i can not conceiv you . 
 glou . sir , thi young fellow 's mother could ; whereupon she grew 
 round-womb 'd , and had inde , sir , a son for her cradl ere she 
 had a husband for her bed . do you smell a fault ? 
 kent . i can not wish the fault undon , the issu of it be so 
 proper . 
 glou . but i have , sir , a son by order of law , some year elder than 
 thi , who yet is no dearer in my account . though thi knave came 
 someth saucili into the world befor he wa sent for , yet wa 
 hi mother fair , there wa good sport at hi make , and the 
 whoreson must be acknowledged.- do you know thi nobl gentleman , 
 edmund ? 
 edm . [ come forward ] no , my lord . 
 glou . my lord of kent . rememb him hereaft as my honour 
 friend . 
 edm . my servic to your lordship . 
 kent . i must love you , and sue to know you better . 
 edm . sir , i shall studi deserv . 
 glou . he hath been out nine year , and away he shall again . 
 sound a sennet . 
 the king is come . 
 
 enter one bear a coronet ; then lear ; then the duke of 
 albani and cornwal ; next , goneril , regan , cordelia , with 
 follow . 
 
 lear . attend the lord of franc and burgundi , gloucest . 
 glou . i shall , my lieg . 
 exeunt [ gloucest and edmund ] . 
 lear . meantim we shall express our darker purpos . 
 give me the map there . know we have divid 
 in three our kingdom ; and 't is our fast intent 
 to shake all care and busi from our age , 
 confer them on younger strength while we 
 unburthen 'd crawl toward death . our son of cornwal , 
 and you , our no less love son of albani , 
 we have thi hour a constant will to publish 
 our daughter ' sever dower , that futur strife 
 may be prevent now . the princ , franc and burgundi , 
 great rival in our youngest daughter 's love , 
 long in our court have made their amor sojourn , 
 and here are to be answer 'd . tell me , my daughter 
 ( sinc now we will divest us both of rule , 
 interest of territori , care of state ) , 
 which of you shall we say doth love us most ? 
 that we our largest bounti may extend 
 where natur doth with merit challeng . goneril , 
 our eldest-born , speak first . 
 gon . sir , i love you more than word can wield the matter ; 
 dearer than eyesight , space , and liberti ; 
 beyond what can be valu , rich or rare ; 
 no less than life , with grace , health , beauti , honour ; 
 as much as child e'er lov 'd , or father found ; 
 a love that make breath poor , and speech unabl . 
 beyond all manner of so much i love you . 
 cor . [ asid ] what shall cordelia speak ? love , and be silent . 
 lear . of all these bound , even from thi line to thi , 
 with shadowi forest and with champain rich 'd , 
 with plenteou river and wide-skirt mead , 
 we make thee ladi . to thine and albani 's issu 
 be thi perpetual.- what say our second daughter , 
 our dearest regan , wife to cornwal ? speak . 
 reg . sir , i am made 
 of the selfsam metal that my sister is , 
 and prize me at her worth . in my true heart 
 i find she name my veri deed of love ; 
 onli she come too short , that i profess 
 myself an enemi to all other joy 
 which the most preciou squar of sens possess , 
 and find i am alon felicit 
 in your dear high ' love . 
 cor . [ asid ] then poor cordelia ! 
 and yet not so ; sinc i am sure my love 's 
 more richer than my tongu . 
 lear . to thee and thine hereditari ever 
 remain thi ampl third of our fair kingdom , 
 no less in space , valid , and pleasur 
 than that conferr 'd on goneril.- now , our joy , 
 although the last , not least ; to whose young love 
 the vine of franc and milk of burgundi 
 strive to be interest ; what can you say to draw 
 a third more opul than your sister ? speak . 
 cor . noth , my lord . 
 lear . noth ? 
 cor . noth . 
 lear . noth can come of noth . speak again . 
 cor . unhappi that i am , i can not heav 
 my heart into my mouth . i love your majesti 
 accord to my bond ; no more nor less . 
 lear . how , how , cordelia ? mend your speech a littl , 
 lest it may mar your fortun . 
 cor . good my lord , 
 you have begot me , bred me , lov 'd me ; i 
 return those duti back as are right fit , 
 obey you , love you , and most honour you . 
 whi have my sister husband , if they say 
 they love you all ? hapli , when i shall wed , 
 that lord whose hand must take my plight shall carri 
 half my love with him , half my care and duti . 
 sure i shall never marri like my sister , 
 to love my father all . 
 lear . but goe thi heart with thi ? 
 cor . ay , good my lord . 
 lear . so young , and so untend ? 
 cor . so young , my lord , and true . 
 lear . let it be so ! thi truth then be thi dower ! 
 for , by the sacr radianc of the sun , 
 the mysteri of hecat and the night ; 
 by all the oper of the orb 
 from whom we do exist and ceas to be ; 
 here i disclaim all my patern care , 
 propinqu and properti of blood , 
 and as a stranger to my heart and me 
 hold thee from thi for ever . the barbar scythian , 
 or he that make hi gener mess 
 to gorg hi appetit , shall to my bosom 
 be as well neighbour 'd , piti , and reliev 'd , 
 as thou my sometim daughter . 
 kent . good my liege- 
 lear . peac , kent ! 
 come not between the dragon and hi wrath . 
 i lov 'd her most , and thought to set my rest 
 on her kind nursery.- henc and avoid my sight ! - 
 so be my grave my peac as here i give 
 her father 's heart from her ! call franc ! who stir ? 
 call burgundi ! cornwal and albani , 
 with my two daughter ' dower digest thi third ; 
 let pride , which she call plain , marri her . 
 i do invest you jointli in my power , 
 preemin , and all the larg effect 
 that troop with majesti . ourself , by monthli cours , 
 with reserv of an hundr knight , 
 by you to be sustain 'd , shall our abod 
 make with you by due turn . onli we still retain 
 the name , and all th ' addit to a king . the sway , 
 revenu , execut of the rest , 
 belov son , be your ; which to confirm , 
 thi coronet part betwixt you . 
 kent . royal lear , 
 whom i have ever honour 'd as my king , 
 lov 'd as my father , as my master follow 'd , 
 as my great patron thought on in my prayers- 
 lear . the bow is bent and drawn ; make from the shaft . 
 kent . let it fall rather , though the fork invad 
 the region of my heart ! be kent unmannerli 
 when lear is mad . what wouldst thou do , old man ? 
 think'st thou that duti shall have dread to speak 
 when power to flatteri bow ? to plain honour 's bound 
 when majesti fall to folli . revers thi doom ; 
 and in thi best consider check 
 thi hideou rash . answer my life my judgment , 
 thi youngest daughter doe not love thee least , 
 nor are those empty-heart whose low sound 
 reverb no hollow . 
 lear . kent , on thi life , no more ! 
 kent . my life i never held but as a pawn 
 to wage against thine enemi ; nor fear to lose it , 
 thi safeti be the motiv . 
 lear . out of my sight ! 
 kent . see better , lear , and let me still remain 
 the true blank of thine eye . 
 lear . now by apollo- 
 kent . now by apollo , king , 
 thou swear'st thi god in vain . 
 lear . o vassal ! miscreant ! 
 [ lay hi hand on hi sword . ] 
 alb. , corn . dear sir , forbear ! 
 kent . do ! 
 kill thi physician , and the fee bestow 
 upon the foul diseas . revok thi gift , 
 or , whilst i can vent clamour from my throat , 
 i 'll tell thee thou dost evil . 
 lear . hear me , recreant ! 
 on thine allegi , hear me ! 
 sinc thou hast sought to make us break our vow- 
 which we durst never yet- and with strain 'd pride 
 to come between our sentenc and our power , - 
 which nor our natur nor our place can bear , - 
 our potenc made good , take thi reward . 
 five day we do allot thee for provis 
 to shield thee from diseas of the world , 
 and on the sixth to turn thi hate back 
 upon our kingdom . if , on the tenth day follow , 
 thi banish 'd trunk be found in our dominion , 
 the moment is thi death . away ! by jupit , 
 thi shall not be revok 'd . 
 kent . fare thee well , king . sinc thu thou wilt appear , 
 freedom live henc , and banish is here . 
 [ to cordelia ] the god to their dear shelter take thee , maid , 
 that justli think'st and hast most rightli said ! 
 [ to regan and goneril ] and your larg speech may your deed 
 approv , 
 that good effect may spring from word of love . 
 thu kent , o princ , bid you all adieu ; 
 he 'll shape hi old cours in a countri new . 
 exit . 
 
 flourish . enter gloucest , with franc and burgundi ; attend . 
 
 glou . here 's franc and burgundi , my nobl lord . 
 lear . my lord of burgundi , 
 we first address toward you , who with thi king 
 hath rival 'd for our daughter . what in the least 
 will you requir in present dower with her , 
 or ceas your quest of love ? 
 bur . most royal majesti , 
 i crave no more than hath your high offer 'd , 
 nor will you tender less . 
 lear . right nobl burgundi , 
 when she wa dear to us , we did hold her so ; 
 but now her price is fall'n . sir , there she stand . 
 if aught within that littl seem substanc , 
 or all of it , with our displeasur piec 'd , 
 and noth more , may fitli like your grace , 
 she 's there , and she is your . 
 bur . i know no answer . 
 lear . will you , with those infirm she owe , 
 unfriend , new adopt to our hate , 
 dow ' r 'd with our curs , and stranger 'd with our oath , 
 take her , or leav her ? 
 bur . pardon me , royal sir . 
 elect make not up on such condit . 
 lear . then leav her , sir ; for , by the pow ' r that made me , 
 i tell you all her wealth . [ to franc ] for you , great king , 
 i would not from your love make such a stray 
 to match you where i hate ; therefor beseech you 
 t ' avert your like a more worthier way 
 than on a wretch whom natur is asham 'd 
 almost t ' acknowledg her . 
 franc . thi is most strang , 
 that she that even but now wa your best object , 
 the argument of your prais , balm of your age , 
 most best , most dearest , should in thi trice of time 
 commit a thing so monstrou to dismantl 
 so mani fold of favour . sure her offenc 
 must be of such unnatur degre 
 that monster it , or your fore-vouch 'd affect 
 fall'n into taint ; which to believ of her 
 must be a faith that reason without miracl 
 should never plant in me . 
 cor . i yet beseech your majesti , 
 if for i want that glib and oili art 
 to speak and purpos not , sinc what i well intend , 
 i 'll do't befor i speak- that you make known 
 it is no viciou blot , murther , or foul , 
 no unchast action or dishonour step , 
 that hath depriv 'd me of your grace and favour ; 
 but even for want of that for which i am richer- 
 a still-solicit eye , and such a tongu 
 as i am glad i have not , though not to have it 
 hath lost me in your like . 
 lear . better thou 
 hadst not been born than not t ' have plea 'd me better . 
 franc . is it but this- a tardi in natur 
 which often leav the histori unspok 
 that it intend to do ? my lord of burgundi , 
 what say you to the ladi ? love 's not love 
 when it is mingl with regard that stand 
 aloof from th ' entir point . will you have her ? 
 she is herself a dowri . 
 bur . royal lear , 
 give but that portion which yourself propo 'd , 
 and here i take cordelia by the hand , 
 duchess of burgundi . 
 lear . noth ! i have sworn ; i am firm . 
 bur . i am sorri then you have so lost a father 
 that you must lose a husband . 
 cor . peac be with burgundi ! 
 sinc that respect of fortun are hi love , 
 i shall not be hi wife . 
 franc . fairest cordelia , that art most rich , be poor ; 
 most choic , forsaken ; and most lov 'd , despi 'd ! 
 thee and thi virtu here i seiz upon . 
 be it law i take up what 's cast away . 
 god , god ! 't is strang that from their cold'st neglect 
 my love should kindl to inflam 'd respect . 
 thi dow'rless daughter , king , thrown to my chanc , 
 is queen of us , of our , and our fair franc . 
 not all the duke in wat'rish burgundi 
 can buy thi unpriz 'd preciou maid of me . 
 bid them farewel , cordelia , though unkind . 
 thou losest here , a better where to find . 
 lear . thou hast her , franc ; let her be thine ; for we 
 have no such daughter , nor shall ever see 
 that face of her again . therefor be gone 
 without our grace , our love , our benison . 
 come , nobl burgundi . 
 flourish . exeunt lear , burgundi , [ cornwal , albani , 
 gloucest , and attend ] . 
 franc . bid farewel to your sister . 
 cor . the jewel of our father , with wash 'd eye 
 cordelia leav you . i know you what you are ; 
 and , like a sister , am most loath to call 
 your fault as they are nam 'd . use well our father . 
 to your profess bosom i commit him ; 
 but yet , ala , stood i within hi grace , 
 i would prefer him to a better place ! 
 so farewel to you both . 
 gon . prescrib not us our duti . 
 reg . let your studi 
 be to content your lord , who hath receiv 'd you 
 at fortun 's alm . you have obedi scant , 
 and well are worth the want that you have want . 
 cor . time shall unfold what plight cun hide . 
 who cover fault , at last shame them derid . 
 well may you prosper ! 
 franc . come , my fair cordelia . 
 exeunt franc and cordelia . 
 gon . sister , it is not littl i have to say of what most nearli 
 appertain to us both . i think our father will henc to-night . 
 reg . that 's most certain , and with you ; next month with us . 
 gon . you see how full of chang hi age is . the observ we 
 have made of it hath not been littl . he alway lov 'd our 
 sister most , and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her 
 off appear too grossli . 
 reg . 't is the infirm of hi age ; yet he hath ever but slenderli 
 known himself . 
 gon . the best and soundest of hi time hath been but rash ; then 
 must we look to receiv from hi age , not alon the 
 imperfect of long-ingraf condit , but therewith 
 the unruli wayward that infirm and choler year bring with 
 them . 
 reg . such unconst start are we like to have from him as thi 
 of kent 's banish . 
 gon . there is further compliment of leave-tak between franc and 
 him . pray you let 's hit togeth . if our father carri author 
 with such disposit as he bear , thi last surrend of hi 
 will but offend us . 
 reg . we shall further think o n't . 
 gon . we must do someth , and i ' th ' heat . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the earl of gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter [ edmund the ] bastard solu , [ with a letter ] . 
 
 edm . thou , natur , art my goddess ; to thi law 
 my servic are bound . wherefor should i 
 stand in the plagu of custom , and permit 
 the curios of nation to depriv me , 
 for that i am some twelv or fourteen moonshin 
 lag of a brother ? whi bastard ? wherefor base ? 
 when my dimens are as well compact , 
 my mind as gener , and my shape as true , 
 as honest madam 's issu ? whi brand they us 
 with base ? with base ? bastardi ? base , base ? 
 who , in the lusti stealth of natur , take 
 more composit and fierc qualiti 
 than doth , within a dull , stale , tire bed , 
 go to th ' creat a whole tribe of fop 
 got 'tween asleep and wake ? well then , 
 legitim edgar , i must have your land . 
 our father 's love is to the bastard edmund 
 as to th ' legitim . fine word- 'legitim ' ! 
 well , my legitim , if thi letter speed , 
 and my invent thrive , edmund the base 
 shall top th ' legitim . i grow ; i prosper . 
 now , god , stand up for bastard ! 
 
 enter gloucest . 
 
 glou . kent banish 'd thu ? and franc in choler part ? 
 and the king gone to-night ? subscrib 'd hi pow ' r ? 
 confin 'd to exhibit ? all thi done 
 upon the gad ? edmund , how now ? what news ? 
 edm . so pleas your lordship , none . 
 [ put up the letter . ] 
 glou . whi so earnestli seek you to put up that letter ? 
 edm . i know no news , my lord . 
 glou . what paper were you read ? 
 edm . noth , my lord . 
 glou . no ? what need then that terribl dispatch of it into your 
 pocket ? the qualiti of noth hath not such need to hide 
 itself . let 's see . come , if it be noth , i shall not need 
 spectacl . 
 edm . i beseech you , sir , pardon me . it is a letter from my brother 
 that i have not all o'er-read ; and for so much as i have 
 peru 'd , i find it not fit for your o'erlook . 
 glou . give me the letter , sir . 
 edm . i shall offend , either to detain or give it . the content , as 
 in part i understand them , are to blame . 
 glou . let 's see , let 's see ! 
 edm . i hope , for my brother 's justif , he wrote thi but as 
 an essay or tast of my virtu . 
 
 glou . ( read ) 'thi polici and rever of age make the world 
 bitter to the best of our time ; keep our fortun from us 
 till our old can not relish them . i begin to find an idl 
 and fond bondag in the oppress of age tyranni , who sway , 
 not as it hath power , but as it is suffer 'd . come to me , that 
 of thi i may speak more . if our father would sleep till i 
 wak 'd him , you should enjoy half hi revenu for ever , and live 
 the belov of your brother , 
 'edgar . ' 
 
 hum ! conspiraci ? 'sleep till i wak 'd him , you should enjoy half 
 hi revenu . ' my son edgar ! had he a hand to write thi ? a heart 
 and brain to breed it in ? when came thi to you ? who brought it ? 
 edm . it wa not brought me , my lord : there 's the cun of it . i 
 found it thrown in at the casement of my closet . 
 glou . you know the charact to be your brother 's ? 
 edm . if the matter were good , my lord , i durst swear it were hi ; 
 but in respect of that , i would fain think it were not . 
 glou . it is hi . 
 edm . it is hi hand , my lord ; but i hope hi heart is not in the 
 content . 
 glou . hath he never befor sound you in thi busi ? 
 edm . never , my lord . but i have heard him oft maintain it to be fit 
 that , son at perfect age , and father declin , the father 
 should be as ward to the son , and the son manag hi revenu . 
 glou . o villain , villain ! hi veri opinion in the letter ! abhor 
 villain ! unnatur , detest , brutish villain ! wors than 
 brutish ! go , sirrah , seek him . i 'll apprehend him . abomin 
 villain ! where is he ? 
 edm . i do not well know , my lord . if it shall pleas you to suspend 
 your indign against my brother till you can deriv from him 
 better testimoni of hi intent , you should run a certain cours ; 
 where , if you violent proceed against him , mistak hi 
 purpos , it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake 
 in piec the heart of hi obedi . i dare pawn down my life 
 for him that he hath writ thi to feel my affect to your 
 honour , and to no other pretenc of danger . 
 glou . think you so ? 
 edm . if your honour judg it meet , i will place you where you shall 
 hear us confer of thi and by an auricular assur have your 
 satisfact , and that without ani further delay than thi veri 
 even . 
 glou . he can not be such a monster . 
 edm . nor is not , sure . 
 glou . to hi father , that so tenderli and entir love him . 
 heaven and earth ! edmund , seek him out ; wind me into him , i pray 
 you ; frame the busi after your own wisdom . i would unstat 
 myself to be in a due resolut . 
 edm . i will seek him , sir , present ; convey the busi as i 
 shall find mean , and acquaint you withal . 
 glou . these late eclips in the sun and moon portend no good to 
 us . though the wisdom of natur can reason it thu and thu , yet 
 natur find itself scourg 'd by the sequent effect . love cool , 
 friendship fall off , brother divid . in citi , mutini ; in 
 countri , discord ; in palac , treason ; and the bond crack 'd 
 'twixt son and father . thi villain of mine come under the 
 predict ; there 's son against father : the king fall from bia 
 of natur ; there 's father against child . we have seen the best 
 of our time . machin , hollow , treacheri , and all 
 ruinou disord follow us disquietli to our grave . find out 
 thi villain , edmund ; it shall lose thee noth ; do it 
 care . and the nobl and true-heart kent banish 'd ! hi 
 offenc , honesti ! 't is strang . exit . 
 edm . thi is the excel fopperi of the world , that , when we are 
 sick in fortun , often the surfeit of our own behaviour , we make 
 guilti of our disast the sun , the moon , and the star ; as if 
 we were villain on necess ; fool by heavenli compuls ; 
 knave , thiev , and treacher by spheric pre-domin ; 
 drunkard , liar , and adulter by an enforc 'd obedi of 
 planetari influenc ; and all that we are evil in , by a divin 
 thrust on . an admir evas of whore-mast man , to lay 
 hi goatish disposit to the charg of a star ! my father 
 compound with my mother under the dragon 's tail , and my 
 nativ wa under ursa major , so that it follow i am rough and 
 lecher . fut ! i should have been that i am , had the 
 maidenliest star in the firmament twinkl on my bastard . 
 edgar- 
 
 enter edgar . 
 
 and pat ! he come , like the catastroph of the old comedi . my 
 cue is villain melancholi , with a sigh like tom o ' bedlam . 
 o , these eclips do portend these divis ! fa , sol , la , mi . 
 edg . how now , brother edmund ? what seriou contempl are you 
 in ? 
 edm . i am think , brother , of a predict i read thi other day , 
 what should follow these eclips . 
 edg . do you busi yourself with that ? 
 edm . i promis you , the effect he write of succeed unhappili : as 
 of unnatur between the child and the parent ; death , 
 dearth , dissolut of ancient amiti ; divis in state , 
 menac and maledict against king and nobl ; needless 
 diffid , banish of friend , dissip of cohort , 
 nuptial breach , and i know not what . 
 edg . how long have you been a sectari astronom ? 
 edm . come , come ! when saw you my father last ? 
 edg . the night gone by . 
 edm . spake you with him ? 
 edg . ay , two hour togeth . 
 edm . part you in good term ? found you no displeasur in him by 
 word or counten 
 edg . none at all . 
 edm . bethink yourself wherein you may have offend him ; and at my 
 entreati forbear hi presenc until some littl time hath 
 qualifi the heat of hi displeasur , which at thi instant so 
 rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would 
 scarc allay . 
 edg . some villain hath done me wrong . 
 edm . that 's my fear . i pray you have a contin forbear till 
 the speed of hi rage goe slower ; and , as i say , retir with me 
 to my lodg , from whenc i will fitli bring you to hear my 
 lord speak . pray ye , go ! there 's my key . if you do stir abroad , 
 go arm 'd . 
 edg . arm 'd , brother ? 
 edm . brother , i advis you to the best . go arm 'd . i am no honest man 
 if there be ani good mean toward you . i have told you what i 
 have seen and heard ; but faintli , noth like the imag and 
 horror of it . pray you , away ! 
 edg . shall i hear from you anon ? 
 edm . i do serv you in thi busi . 
 exit edgar . 
 a credul father ! and a brother nobl , 
 whose natur is so far from do harm 
 that he suspect none ; on whose foolish honesti 
 my practic ride easi ! i see the busi . 
 let me , if not by birth , have land by wit ; 
 all with me 's meet that i can fashion fit . 
 exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the duke of albani 's palac . 
 
 enter goneril and [ her ] steward [ oswald ] . 
 
 gon . did my father strike my gentleman for chide of hi fool ? 
 osw . ay , madam . 
 gon . by day and night , he wrong me ! everi hour 
 he flash into one gross crime or other 
 that set us all at odd . i 'll not endur it . 
 hi knight grow riotou , and himself upbraid us 
 on everi trifl . when he return from hunt , 
 i will not speak with him . say i am sick . 
 if you come slack of former servic , 
 you shall do well ; the fault of it i 'll answer . 
 [ horn within . ] 
 osw . he 's come , madam ; i hear him . 
 gon . put on what weari neglig you pleas , 
 you and your fellow . i 'd have it come to question . 
 if he distast it , let him to our sister , 
 whose mind and mine i know in that are one , 
 not to be overrul 'd . idl old man , 
 that still would manag those author 
 that he hath given away ! now , by my life , 
 old fool are babe again , and must be us 'd 
 with check as flatteri , when they are seen abu 'd . 
 rememb what i have said . 
 osw . veri well , madam . 
 gon . and let hi knight have colder look among you . 
 what grow of it , no matter . advis your fellow so . 
 i would breed from henc occas , and i shall , 
 that i may speak . i 'll write straight to my sister 
 to hold my veri cours . prepar for dinner . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the duke of albani 's palac . 
 
 enter kent , [ disguis ] . 
 
 kent . if but as well i other accent borrow , 
 that can my speech defus , my good intent 
 may carri through itself to that full issu 
 for which i raz 'd my like . now , banish 'd kent , 
 if thou canst serv where thou dost stand condemn 'd , 
 so may it come , thi master , whom thou lov'st , 
 shall find thee full of labour . 
 
 horn within . enter lear , [ knight , ] and attend . 
 
 lear . let me not stay a jot for dinner ; go get it readi . [ exit 
 an attend . ] how now ? what art thou ? 
 kent . a man , sir . 
 lear . what dost thou profess ? what wouldst thou with us ? 
 kent . i do profess to be no less than i seem , to serv him truli 
 that will put me in trust , to love him that is honest , to 
 convers with him that is wise and say littl , to fear 
 judgment , to fight when i can not choos , and to eat no fish . 
 lear . what art thou ? 
 kent . a veri honest-heart fellow , and as poor as the king . 
 lear . if thou be'st as poor for a subject as he 's for a king , thou 
 art poor enough . what wouldst thou ? 
 kent . servic . 
 lear . who wouldst thou serv ? 
 kent . you . 
 lear . dost thou know me , fellow ? 
 kent . no , sir ; but you have that in your counten which i would 
 fain call master . 
 lear . what 's that ? 
 kent . author . 
 lear . what servic canst thou do ? 
 kent . i can keep honest counsel , ride , run , mar a curiou tale in 
 tell it and deliv a plain messag bluntli . that which 
 ordinari men are fit for , i am qualifi in , and the best of me 
 is dilig . 
 lear . how old art thou ? 
 kent . not so young , sir , to love a woman for sing , nor so old to 
 dote on her for anyth . i have year on my back forty-eight . 
 lear . follow me ; thou shalt serv me . if i like thee no wors after 
 dinner , i will not part from thee yet . dinner , ho , dinner ! 
 where 's my knave ? my fool ? go you and call my fool hither . 
 
 [ exit an attend . ] 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 you , you , sirrah , where 's my daughter ? 
 osw . so pleas you- exit . 
 lear . what say the fellow there ? call the clotpol back . 
 [ exit a knight . ] where 's my fool , ho ? i think the world 's 
 asleep . 
 
 [ enter knight ] 
 
 how now ? where 's that mongrel ? 
 knight . he say , my lord , your daughter is not well . 
 lear . whi came not the slave back to me when i call 'd him ? 
 knight . sir , he answer me in the roundest manner , he would not . 
 lear . he would not ? 
 knight . my lord , i know not what the matter is ; but to my judgment 
 your high is not entertain 'd with that ceremoni affect 
 as you were wont . there 's a great abat of kind appear 
 as well in the gener depend as in the duke himself also 
 and your daughter . 
 lear . ha ! say'st thou so ? 
 knight . i beseech you pardon me , my lord , if i be mistaken ; for 
 my duti can not be silent when i think your high wrong 'd . 
 lear . thou but rememb'rest me of mine own concept . i have 
 perceiv a most faint neglect of late , which i have rather 
 blame as mine own jealou curios than as a veri pretenc 
 and purpos of unkind . i will look further into't . but 
 where 's my fool ? i have not seen him thi two day . 
 knight . sinc my young ladi 's go into franc , sir , the fool 
 hath much pine away . 
 lear . no more of that ; i have note it well . go you and tell my 
 daughter i would speak with her . [ exit knight . ] go you , call 
 hither my fool . 
 [ exit an attend . ] 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 o , you , sir , you ! come you hither , sir . who am i , sir ? 
 osw . my ladi 's father . 
 lear . 'mi ladi 's father ' ? my lord 's knave ! you whoreson dog ! you 
 slave ! you cur ! 
 osw . i am none of these , my lord ; i beseech your pardon . 
 lear . do you bandi look with me , you rascal ? 
 [ strike him . ] 
 osw . i 'll not be strucken , my lord . 
 kent . nor tripp 'd neither , you base footbal player ? 
 [ trip up hi heel . 
 lear . i thank thee , fellow . thou serv'st me , and i 'll love thee . 
 kent . come , sir , aris , away ! i 'll teach you differ . away , 
 away ! if you will measur your lubber 's length again , tarri ; but 
 away ! go to ! have you wisdom ? so . 
 [ push him out . ] 
 lear . now , my friendli knave , i thank thee . there 's earnest of thi 
 servic . [ give money . ] 
 
 enter fool . 
 
 fool . let me hire him too . here 's my coxcomb . 
 [ offer kent hi cap . ] 
 lear . how now , my pretti knave ? how dost thou ? 
 fool . sirrah , you were best take my coxcomb . 
 kent . whi , fool ? 
 fool . whi ? for take one 's part that 's out of favour . nay , an thou 
 canst not smile as the wind sit , thou'lt catch cold shortli . 
 there , take my coxcomb ! whi , thi fellow hath banish 'd two on 's 
 daughter , and did the third a bless against hi will . if 
 thou follow him , thou must need wear my coxcomb.- how now , 
 nuncl ? would i had two coxcomb and two daughter ! 
 lear . whi , my boy ? 
 fool . if i gave them all my live , i'ld keep my coxcomb myself . 
 there 's mine ! beg anoth of thi daughter . 
 lear . take heed , sirrah- the whip . 
 fool . truth 's a dog must to kennel ; he must be whipp 'd out , when 
 ladi the brach may stand by th ' fire and stink . 
 lear . a pestil gall to me ! 
 fool . sirrah , i 'll teach thee a speech . 
 lear . do . 
 fool . mark it , nuncl . 
 have more than thou showest , 
 speak less than thou knowest , 
 lend less than thou owest , 
 ride more than thou goest , 
 learn more than thou trowest , 
 set less than thou throwest ; 
 leav thi drink and thi whore , 
 and keep in-a-door , 
 and thou shalt have more 
 than two ten to a score . 
 kent . thi is noth , fool . 
 fool . then 't is like the breath of an unfe lawyer- you gave me 
 noth for't . can you make no use of noth , nuncl ? 
 lear . whi , no , boy . noth can be made out of noth . 
 fool . [ to kent ] prithe tell him , so much the rent of hi land 
 come to . he will not believ a fool . 
 lear . a bitter fool ! 
 fool . dost thou know the differ , my boy , between a bitter 
 fool and a sweet fool ? 
 lear . no , lad ; teach me . 
 fool . that lord that counsel 'd thee 
 to give away thi land , 
 come place him here by me- 
 do thou for him stand . 
 the sweet and bitter fool 
 will present appear ; 
 the one in motley here , 
 the other found out there . 
 lear . dost thou call me fool , boy ? 
 fool . all thi other titl thou hast given away ; that thou wast 
 born with . 
 kent . thi is not altogeth fool , my lord . 
 fool . no , faith ; lord and great men will not let me . if i had a 
 monopoli out , they would have part o n't . and ladi too , they 
 will not let me have all the fool to myself ; they 'll be 
 snatch . give me an egg , nuncl , and i 'll give thee two 
 crown . 
 lear . what two crown shall they be ? 
 fool . whi , after i have cut the egg i ' th ' middl and eat up the 
 meat , the two crown of the egg . when thou clovest thi crown i ' 
 th ' middl and gav'st away both part , thou bor'st thine ass on 
 thi back o'er the dirt . thou hadst littl wit in thi bald crown 
 when thou gav'st thi golden one away . if i speak like myself in 
 thi , let him be whipp 'd that first find it so . 
 
 [ sing ] fool had ne'er less grace in a year , 
 for wise men are grown foppish ; 
 they know not how their wit to wear , 
 their manner are so apish . 
 
 lear . when were you wont to be so full of song , sirrah ? 
 fool . i have us 'd it , nuncl , ever sinc thou mad'st thi daughter 
 thi mother ; for when thou gav'st them the rod , and put'st down 
 thine own breech , 
 
 [ sing ] then they for sudden joy did weep , 
 and i for sorrow sung , 
 that such a king should play bo-peep 
 and go the fool among . 
 
 prithe , nuncl , keep a schoolmast that can teach thi fool to 
 lie . i would fain learn to lie . 
 lear . an you lie , sirrah , we 'll have you whipp 'd . 
 fool . i marvel what kin thou and thi daughter are . they 'll have me 
 whipp 'd for speak true ; thou'lt have me whipp 'd for lie ; 
 and sometim i am whipp 'd for hold my peac . i had rather be 
 ani kind o ' thing than a fool ! and yet i would not be thee , 
 nuncl . thou hast pare thi wit o ' both side and left noth 
 i ' th ' middl . here come one o ' the pare . 
 
 enter goneril . 
 
 lear . how now , daughter ? what make that frontlet on ? methink you 
 are too much o ' late i ' th ' frown . 
 fool . thou wast a pretti fellow when thou hadst no need to care for 
 her frown . now thou art an o without a figur . i am better 
 than thou art now : i am a fool , thou art noth . 
 [ to goneril ] ye , forsooth , i will hold my tongu . so your face 
 bid me , though you say noth . mum , mum ! 
 
 he that keep nor crust nor crum , 
 weari of all , shall want some.- 
 
 [ point at lear ] that 's a sheal 'd peascod . 
 gon . not onli , sir , thi your all-licen 'd fool , 
 but other of your insol retinu 
 do hourli carp and quarrel , break forth 
 in rank and not-to-be-endur riot . sir , 
 i had thought , by make thi well known unto you , 
 to have found a safe redress , but now grow fear , 
 by what yourself , too , late have spoke and done , 
 that you protect thi cours , and put it on 
 by your allow ; which if you should , the fault 
 would not scape censur , nor the redress sleep , 
 which , in the tender of a wholesom weal , 
 might in their work do you that offenc 
 which els were shame , that then necess 
 must call discreet proceed . 
 fool . for you know , nuncl , 
 
 the hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long 
 that it had it head bit off by it young . 
 
 so out went the candl , and we were left darkl . 
 lear . are you our daughter ? 
 gon . come , sir , 
 i would you would make use of that good wisdom 
 whereof i know you are fraught , and put away 
 these disposit that of late transform you 
 from what you rightli are . 
 fool . may not an ass know when the cart draw the hors ? 
 whoop , jug , i love thee ! 
 lear . doth ani here know me ? thi is not lear . 
 doth lear walk thu ? speak thu ? where are hi eye ? 
 either hi notion weaken , hi discern 
 are lethargied- ha ! wake ? 't is not so ! 
 who is it that can tell me who i am ? 
 fool . lear 's shadow . 
 lear . i would learn that ; for , by the mark of sovereignti , 
 knowledg , and reason , i should be fals persuad 
 i had daughter . 
 fool . which they will make an obedi father . 
 lear . your name , fair gentlewoman ? 
 gon . thi admir , sir , is much o ' th ' savour 
 of other your new prank . i do beseech you 
 to understand my purpos aright . 
 as you are old and reverend , you should be wise . 
 here do you keep a hundr knight and squir ; 
 men so disord 'd , so debosh 'd , and bold 
 that thi our court , infect with their manner , 
 show like a riotou inn . epicur and lust 
 make it more like a tavern or a brothel 
 than a grac 'd palac . the shame itself doth speak 
 for instant remedi . be then desir 'd 
 by her that els will take the thing she beg 
 a littl to disquant your train , 
 and the remaind that shall still depend 
 to be such men as may besort your age , 
 which know themselv , and you . 
 lear . dark and devil ! 
 saddl my hors ! call my train togeth ! 
 degener bastard , i 'll not troubl thee ; 
 yet have i left a daughter . 
 gon . you strike my peopl , and your disord 'd rabbl 
 make servant of their better . 
 
 enter albani . 
 
 lear . woe that too late repent ! - o , sir , are you come ? 
 is it your will ? speak , sir ! - prepar my hors . 
 ingratitud , thou marble-heart fiend , 
 more hideou when thou show'st thee in a child 
 than the sea-monst ! 
 alb . pray , sir , be patient . 
 lear . [ to goneril ] detest kite , thou liest ! 
 my train are men of choic and rarest part , 
 that all particular of duti know 
 and in the most exact regard support 
 the worship of their name.- o most small fault , 
 how ugli didst thou in cordelia show ! 
 which , like an engin , wrench 'd my frame of natur 
 from the fix 'd place ; drew from my heart all love 
 and ad to the gall . o lear , lear , lear ! 
 beat at thi gate that let thi folli in [ strike hi head . ] 
 and thi dear judgment out ! go , go , my peopl . 
 alb . my lord , i am guiltless , as i am ignor 
 of what hath mov 'd you . 
 lear . it may be so , my lord . 
 hear , natur , hear ! dear goddess , hear ! 
 suspend thi purpos , if thou didst intend 
 to make thi creatur fruit . 
 into her womb convey steril ; 
 dri up in her the organ of increas ; 
 and from her derog bodi never spring 
 a babe to honour her ! if she must teem , 
 creat her child of spleen , that it may live 
 and be a thwart disnatur 'd torment to her . 
 let it stamp wrinkl in her brow of youth , 
 with cadent tear fret channel in her cheek , 
 turn all her mother 's pain and benefit 
 to laughter and contempt , that she may feel 
 how sharper than a serpent 's tooth it is 
 to have a thankless child ! away , away ! exit . 
 alb . now , god that we ador , whereof come thi ? 
 gon . never afflict yourself to know the caus ; 
 but let hi disposit have that scope 
 that dotag give it . 
 
 enter lear . 
 
 lear . what , fifti of my follow at a clap ? 
 within a fortnight ? 
 alb . what 's the matter , sir ? 
 lear . i 'll tell thee . [ to goneril ] life and death ! i am asham 'd 
 that thou hast power to shake my manhood thu ; 
 that these hot tear , which break from me perforc , 
 should make thee worth them . blast and fog upon thee ! 
 th ' untent wound of a father 's curs 
 pierc everi sens about thee ! - old fond eye , 
 beweep thi caus again , i 'll pluck ye out , 
 and cast you , with the water that you lose , 
 to temper clay . yea , is it come to thi ? 
 let it be so . yet have i left a daughter , 
 who i am sure is kind and comfort . 
 when she shall hear thi of thee , with her nail 
 she 'll flay thi wolvish visag . thou shalt find 
 that i 'll resum the shape which thou dost think 
 i have cast off for ever ; thou shalt , i warrant thee . 
 exeunt [ lear , kent , and attend ] . 
 gon . do you mark that , my lord ? 
 alb . i can not be so partial , goneril , 
 to the great love i bear you - 
 gon . pray you , content.- what , oswald , ho ! 
 [ to the fool ] you , sir , more knave than fool , after your master ! 
 fool . nuncl lear , nuncl lear , tarri ! take the fool with thee . 
 
 a fox when one ha caught her , 
 and such a daughter , 
 should sure to the slaughter , 
 if my cap would buy a halter . 
 so the fool follow after . exit . 
 gon . thi man hath had good counsel ! a hundr knight ? 
 't is polit and safe to let him keep 
 at point a hundr knight ; ye , that on everi dream , 
 each buzz , each fanci , each complaint , dislik , 
 he may enguard hi dotag with their pow'r 
 and hold our live in mercy.- oswald , i say ! 
 alb . well , you may fear too far . 
 gon . safer than trust too far . 
 let me still take away the harm i fear , 
 not fear still to be taken . i know hi heart . 
 what he hath utter 'd i have writ my sister . 
 if she sustain him and hi hundr knight , 
 when i have show 'd th ' unfitness- 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 how now , oswald ? 
 what , have you writ that letter to my sister ? 
 osw . ye , madam . 
 gon . take you some compani , and away to hors ! 
 inform her full of my particular fear , 
 and thereto add such reason of your own 
 as may compact it more . get you gone , 
 and hasten your return . [ exit oswald . ] no , no , my lord ! 
 thi milki gentl and cours of your , 
 though i condemn it not , yet , under pardon , 
 you are much more at task for want of wisdom 
 than prai 'd for harm mild . 
 alb . how far your eye may pierc i can not tell . 
 strive to better , oft we mar what 's well . 
 gon . nay then- 
 alb . well , well ; th ' event . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 court befor the duke of albani 's palac . 
 
 enter lear , kent , and fool . 
 
 lear . go you befor to gloucest with these letter . acquaint my 
 daughter no further with anyth you know than come from her 
 demand out of the letter . if your dilig be not speedi , i 
 shall be there afor you . 
 kent . i will not sleep , my lord , till i have deliv your letter . 
 exit . 
 fool . if a man 's brain were in 's heel , were't not in danger of 
 kibe ? 
 lear . ay , boy . 
 fool . then i prithe be merri . thi wit shall ne'er go slip-shod . 
 lear . ha , ha , ha ! 
 fool . shalt see thi other daughter will use thee kindli ; for though 
 she 's as like thi as a crab 's like an appl , yet i can tell 
 what i can tell . 
 lear . what canst tell , boy ? 
 fool . she 'll tast as like thi as a crab doe to a crab . thou 
 canst tell whi one 's nose stand i ' th ' middl on 's face ? 
 lear . no . 
 fool . whi , to keep one 's eye of either side 's nose , that what a 
 man can not smell out , ' a may spi into . 
 lear . i did her wrong . 
 fool . canst tell how an oyster make hi shell ? 
 lear . no . 
 fool . nor i neither ; but i can tell whi a snail ha a hous . 
 lear . whi ? 
 fool . whi , to put 's head in ; not to give it away to hi daughter , 
 and leav hi horn without a case . 
 lear . i will forget my natur . so kind a father ! - be my hors 
 readi ? 
 fool . thi ass are gone about 'em . the reason whi the seven star 
 are no moe than seven is a pretti reason . 
 lear . becaus they are not eight ? 
 fool . ye inde . thou wouldst make a good fool . 
 lear . to tak't again perforc ! monster ingratitud ! 
 fool . if thou wert my fool , nuncl , i'ld have thee beaten for be 
 old befor thi time . 
 lear . how 's that ? 
 fool . thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise . 
 lear . o , let me not be mad , not mad , sweet heaven ! 
 keep me in temper ; i would not be mad ! 
 
 [ enter a gentleman . ] 
 
 how now ? are the hors readi ? 
 gent . readi , my lord . 
 lear . come , boy . 
 fool . she that 's a maid now , and laugh at my departur , 
 shall not be a maid long , unless thing be cut shorter 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 a court within the castl of the earl of gloucest . 
 
 enter [ edmund the ] bastard and curan , meet . 
 
 edm . save thee , curan . 
 cur . and you , sir . i have been with your father , and given him 
 notic that the duke of cornwal and regan hi duchess will be 
 here with him thi night . 
 edm . how come that ? 
 cur . nay , i know not . you have heard of the news abroad- i mean the 
 whisper 'd one , for they are yet but ear-kiss argument ? 
 edm . not i. pray you , what are they ? 
 cur . have you heard of no like war toward 'twixt the two duke 
 of cornwal and albani ? 
 edm . not a word . 
 cur . you may do , then , in time . fare you well , sir . exit . 
 edm . the duke be here to-night ? the better ! best ! 
 thi weav itself perforc into my busi . 
 my father hath set guard to take my brother ; 
 and i have one thing , of a queasi question , 
 which i must act . brief and fortun , work ! 
 brother , a word ! descend ! brother , i say ! 
 
 enter edgar . 
 
 my father watch . o sir , fli thi place ! 
 intellig is given where you are hid . 
 you have now the good advantag of the night . 
 have you not spoken 'gainst the duke of cornwal ? 
 he 's come hither ; now , i ' th ' night , i ' th ' hast , 
 and regan with him . have you noth said 
 upon hi parti 'gainst the duke of albani ? 
 advis yourself . 
 edg . i am sure o n't , not a word . 
 edm . i hear my father come . pardon me ! 
 in cun i must draw my sword upon you . 
 draw , seem to defend yourself ; now quit you well.- 
 yield ! come befor my father . light , ho , here ! 
 fli , brother.- torch , torch ! - so farewel . 
 exit edgar . 
 some blood drawn on me would beget opinion 
 of my more fierc endeavour . [ stab hi arm . ] i have seen 
 drunkard 
 do more than thi in sport.- father , father ! - 
 stop , stop ! no help ? 
 
 enter gloucest , and servant with torch . 
 
 glou . now , edmund , where 's the villain ? 
 edm . here stood he in the dark , hi sharp sword out , 
 mumbl of wick charm , conjur the moon 
 to stand 's auspici mistress . 
 glou . but where is he ? 
 edm . look , sir , i bleed . 
 glou . where is the villain , edmund ? 
 edm . fled thi way , sir . when by no mean he could- 
 glou . pursu him , ho ! go after . [ exeunt some servant ] . 
 by no mean what ? 
 edm . persuad me to the murther of your lordship ; 
 but that i told him the reveng god 
 'gainst parricid did all their thunder bend ; 
 spoke with how manifold and strong a bond 
 the child wa bound to th ' father- sir , in fine , 
 see how loathli opposit i stood 
 to hi unnatur purpos , in fell motion 
 with hi prepar sword he charg home 
 my unprovid bodi , lanch 'd mine arm ; 
 but when he saw my best alarum 'd spirit , 
 bold in the quarrel 's right , rou 'd to th ' encount , 
 or whether gast by the nois i made , 
 full suddenli he fled . 
 glou . let him fli far . 
 not in thi land shall he remain uncaught ; 
 and found- dispatch . the nobl duke my master , 
 my worthi arch and patron , come to-night . 
 by hi author i will proclaim it 
 that he which find , him shall deserv our thank , 
 bring the murder caitiff to the stake ; 
 he that conceal him , death . 
 edm . when i dissuad him from hi intent 
 and found him pight to do it , with curst speech 
 i threaten 'd to discov him . he repli , 
 'thou unpossess bastard , dost thou think , 
 if i would stand against thee , would the repos 
 of ani trust , virtu , or worth in thee 
 make thi word faith 'd ? no . what i should deni 
 ( as thi i would ; ay , though thou didst produc 
 my veri charact ) , i'ld turn it all 
 to thi suggest , plot , and damn practic ; 
 and thou must make a dullard of the world , 
 if they not thought the profit of my death 
 were veri pregnant and potenti spur 
 to make thee seek it . ' 
 glou . strong and fast'n villain ! 
 would he deni hi letter ? i never got him . 
 tucket within . 
 hark , the duke 's trumpet ! i know not whi he come . 
 all port i 'll bar ; the villain shall not scape ; 
 the duke must grant me that . besid , hi pictur 
 i will send far and near , that all the kingdom 
 may have due note of him , and of my land , 
 loyal and natur boy , i 'll work the mean 
 to make thee capabl . 
 
 enter cornwal , regan , and attend . 
 
 corn . how now , my nobl friend ? sinc i came hither 
 ( which i can call but now ) i have heard strang news . 
 reg . if it be true , all vengeanc come too short 
 which can pursu th ' offend . how dost , my lord ? 
 glou . o madam , my old heart is crack 'd , it 's crack 'd ! 
 reg . what , did my father 's godson seek your life ? 
 he whom my father nam 'd ? your edgar ? 
 glou . o ladi , ladi , shame would have it hid ! 
 reg . wa he not companion with the riotou knight 
 that tend upon my father ? 
 glou . i know not , madam . 't is too bad , too bad ! 
 edm . ye , madam , he wa of that consort . 
 reg . no marvel then though he were ill affect . 
 't is they have put him on the old man 's death , 
 to have th ' expens and wast of hi revenu . 
 i have thi present even from my sister 
 been well inform 'd of them , and with such caution 
 that , if they come to sojourn at my hous , 
 i 'll not be there . 
 corn . nor i , assur thee , regan . 
 edmund , i hear that you have shown your father 
 a childlik offic . 
 edm . 't wa my duti , sir . 
 glou . he did bewray hi practic , and receiv 'd 
 thi hurt you see , strive to apprehend him . 
 corn . is he pursu ? 
 glou . ay , my good lord . 
 corn . if he be taken , he shall never more 
 be fear 'd of do harm . make your own purpos , 
 how in my strength you pleas . for you , edmund , 
 whose virtu and obedi doth thi instant 
 so much commend itself , you shall be our . 
 natur of such deep trust we shall much need ; 
 you we first seiz on . 
 edm . i shall serv you , sir , 
 truli , howev els . 
 glou . for him i thank your grace . 
 corn . you know not whi we came to visit you- 
 reg . thu out of season , thread dark-ey 'd night . 
 occas , nobl gloucest , of some pois , 
 wherein we must have use of your advic . 
 our father he hath writ , so hath our sister , 
 of differ , which i best thought it fit 
 to answer from our home . the sever messeng 
 from henc attend dispatch . our good old friend , 
 lay comfort to your bosom , and bestow 
 your need counsel to our busi , 
 which crave the instant use . 
 glou . i serv you , madam . 
 your grace are right welcom . 
 exeunt . flourish . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 befor gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter kent and [ oswald the ] steward , sever . 
 
 osw . good dawn to thee , friend . art of thi hous ? 
 kent . ay . 
 osw . where may we set our hors ? 
 kent . i ' th ' mire . 
 osw . prithe , if thou lov'st me , tell me . 
 kent . i love thee not . 
 osw . whi then , i care not for thee . 
 kent . if i had thee in lipsburi pinfold , i would make thee care for 
 me . 
 osw . whi dost thou use me thu ? i know thee not . 
 kent . fellow , i know thee . 
 osw . what dost thou know me for ? 
 kent . a knave ; a rascal ; an eater of broken meat ; a base , proud , 
 shallow , beggarli , three-suit , hundred-pound , filthi , 
 worsted-stock knave ; a lily-liv 'd , action-tak , whoreson , 
 glass-gaz , superservic , finic rogu ; 
 one-trunk-inherit slave ; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of 
 good servic , and art noth but the composit of a knave , 
 beggar , coward , pander , and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch ; 
 one whom i will beat into clamor whine , if thou deni the 
 least syllabl of thi addit . 
 osw . whi , what a monstrou fellow art thou , thu to rail on one 
 that 's neither known of thee nor know thee ! 
 kent . what a brazen-fac 'd varlet art thou , to deni thou knowest me ! 
 is it two day ago sinc i beat thee and tripp 'd up thi heel 
 befor the king ? [ draw hi sword . ] draw , you rogu ! for , though 
 it be night , yet the moon shine . i 'll make a sop o ' th ' 
 moonshin o ' you . draw , you whoreson cullionli barbermong ! 
 draw ! 
 osw . away ! i have noth to do with thee . 
 kent . draw , you rascal ! you come with letter against the king , and 
 take vaniti the puppet 's part against the royalti of her father . 
 draw , you rogu , or i 'll so carbonado your shank ! draw , you 
 rascal ! come your way ! 
 osw . help , ho ! murther ! help ! 
 kent . strike , you slave ! stand , rogu ! stand , you neat slave ! 
 strike ! [ beat him . ] 
 osw . help , ho ! murther ! murther ! 
 
 enter edmund , with hi rapier drawn , gloucest , cornwal , 
 regan , servant . 
 
 edm . how now ? what 's the matter ? part [ them ] . 
 kent . with you , goodman boy , an you pleas ! come , i 'll flesh ye ! 
 come on , young master ! 
 glou . weapon ? arm ? what 's the matter here ? 
 corn . keep peac , upon your live ! 
 he die that strike again . what is the matter ? 
 reg . the messeng from our sister and the king 
 corn . what is your differ ? speak . 
 osw . i am scarc in breath , my lord . 
 kent . no marvel , you have so bestirr 'd your valour . you cowardli 
 rascal , natur disclaim in thee ; a tailor made thee . 
 corn . thou art a strang fellow . a tailor make a man ? 
 kent . ay , a tailor , sir . a stonecutt or a painter could not have 
 made him so ill , though he had been but two hour at the trade . 
 corn . speak yet , how grew your quarrel ? 
 osw . thi ancient ruffian , sir , whose life i have spar 'd 
 at suit of hi grey beard- 
 kent . thou whoreson zed ! thou unnecessari letter ! my lord , if 
 you 'll give me leav , i will tread thi unbolt villain into 
 mortar and daub the wall of a jake with him . 'spare my grey 
 beard , ' you wagtail ? 
 corn . peac , sirrah ! 
 you beastli knave , know you no rever ? 
 kent . ye , sir , but anger hath a privileg . 
 corn . whi art thou angri ? 
 kent . that such a slave as thi should wear a sword , 
 who wear no honesti . such smile rogu as these , 
 like rat , oft bite the holi cord atwain 
 which are too intrins t ' unloos ; smooth everi passion 
 that in the natur of their lord rebel , 
 bring oil to fire , snow to their colder mood ; 
 reneg , affirm , and turn their halcyon beak 
 with everi gale and vari of their master , 
 know naught ( like dog ) but follow . 
 a plagu upon your epilept visag ! 
 smile you my speech , as i were a fool ? 
 goos , an i had you upon sarum plain , 
 i'ld drive ye cackl home to camelot . 
 corn . what , art thou mad , old fellow ? 
 glou . how fell you out ? say that . 
 kent . no contrari hold more antipathi 
 than i and such a knave . 
 corn . whi dost thou call him knave ? what is hi fault ? 
 kent . hi counten like me not . 
 corn . no more perchanc doe mine , or hi , or her . 
 kent . sir , 't is my occup to be plain . 
 i have seen better face in my time 
 than stand on ani shoulder that i see 
 befor me at thi instant . 
 corn . thi is some fellow 
 who , have been prai 'd for blunt , doth affect 
 a sauci rough , and constrain the garb 
 quit from hi natur . he can not flatter , he ! 
 an honest mind and plain- he must speak truth ! 
 an they will take it , so ; if not , he 's plain . 
 these kind of knave i know which in thi plain 
 harbour more craft and more corrupt end 
 than twenti silly-duck observ 
 that stretch their duti nice . 
 kent . sir , in good faith , in sincer veriti , 
 under th ' allow of your great aspect , 
 whose influenc , like the wreath of radiant fire 
 on flicker phoebu ' front- 
 corn . what mean'st by thi ? 
 kent . to go out of my dialect , which you discommend so much . i 
 know , sir , i am no flatter . he that beguil 'd you in a plain 
 accent wa a plain knave , which , for my part , i will not be , 
 though i should win your displeasur to entreat me to't . 
 corn . what wa th ' offenc you gave him ? 
 osw . i never gave him ani . 
 it plea 'd the king hi master veri late 
 to strike at me , upon hi misconstruct ; 
 when he , conjunct , and flatter hi displeasur , 
 tripp 'd me behind ; be down , insult , rail 'd 
 and put upon him such a deal of man 
 that worthi him , got prais of the king 
 for him attempt who wa self-subdu 'd ; 
 and , in the fleshment of thi dread exploit , 
 drew on me here again . 
 kent . none of these rogu and coward 
 but ajax is their fool . 
 corn . fetch forth the stock ! 
 you stubborn ancient knave , you rever braggart , 
 we 'll teach you- 
 kent . sir , i am too old to learn . 
 call not your stock for me . i serv the king ; 
 on whose employ i wa sent to you . 
 you shall do small respect , show too bold malic 
 against the grace and person of my master , 
 stock hi messeng . 
 corn . fetch forth the stock ! as i have life and honour , 
 there shall he sit till noon . 
 reg . till noon ? till night , my lord , and all night too ! 
 kent . whi , madam , if i were your father 's dog , 
 you should not use me so . 
 reg . sir , be hi knave , i will . 
 corn . thi is a fellow of the selfsam colour 
 our sister speak of . come , bring away the stock ! 
 stock brought out . 
 glou . let me beseech your grace not to do so . 
 hi fault is much , and the good king hi master 
 will check him for't . your purpo 'd low correct 
 is such as basest and contemn'dest wretch 
 for pilf'r and most common trespass 
 are punish 'd with . the king must take it ill 
 that he , so slightli valu in hi messeng , 
 should have him thu restrain 'd . 
 corn . i 'll answer that . 
 reg . my sister may receiv it much more wors , 
 to have her gentleman abu 'd , assault , 
 for follow her affair . put in hi legs.- 
 [ kent is put in the stock . ] 
 come , my good lord , away . 
 exeunt [ all but gloucest and kent ] . 
 glou . i am sorri for thee , friend . 't is the duke 's pleasur , 
 whose disposit , all the world well know , 
 will not be rubb 'd nor stopp 'd . i 'll entreat for thee . 
 kent . pray do not , sir . i have watch 'd and travel 'd hard . 
 some time i shall sleep out , the rest i 'll whistl . 
 a good man 's fortun may grow out at heel . 
 give you good morrow ! 
 glou . the duke 's to blame in thi ; 'twill be ill taken . 
 exit . 
 kent . good king , that must approv the common saw , 
 thou out of heaven 's benedict com'st 
 to the warm sun ! 
 approach , thou beacon to thi under globe , 
 that by thi comfort beam i may 
 perus thi letter . noth almost see miracl 
 but miseri . i know 't is from cordelia , 
 who hath most fortun been inform 'd 
 of my obscur course- and [ read ] 'shall find time 
 from thi enorm state , seek to give 
 loss their remedies'- all weari and o'erwatch 'd , 
 take vantag , heavi eye , not to behold 
 thi shame lodg . 
 fortun , good night ; smile onc more , turn thi wheel . 
 sleep . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the open countri . 
 
 enter edgar . 
 
 edg . i heard myself proclaim 'd , 
 and by the happi hollow of a tree 
 escap 'd the hunt . no port is free , no place 
 that guard and most unusu vigil 
 doe not attend my take . while i may scape , 
 i will preserv myself ; and am bethought 
 to take the basest and most poorest shape 
 that ever penuri , in contempt of man , 
 brought near to beast . my face i 'll grime with filth , 
 blanket my loin , elf all my hair in knot , 
 and with present naked outfac 
 the wind and persecut of the sky . 
 the countri give me proof and preced 
 of bedlam beggar , who , with roar voic , 
 strike in their numb 'd and mortifi bare arm 
 pin , wooden prick , nail , sprig of rosemari ; 
 and with thi horribl object , from low farm , 
 poor pelt villag , sheepcot , and mill , 
 sometim with lunat ban , sometim with prayer , 
 enforc their chariti . 'poor turlygod ! poor tom ! ' 
 that 's someth yet ! edgar i noth am . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 befor gloucest 's castl ; kent in the stock . 
 
 enter lear , fool , and gentleman . 
 
 lear . 't is strang that they should so depart from home , 
 and not send back my messeng . 
 gent . as i learn 'd , 
 the night befor there wa no purpos in them 
 of thi remov . 
 kent . hail to thee , nobl master ! 
 lear . ha ! 
 mak'st thou thi shame thi pastim ? 
 kent . no , my lord . 
 fool . ha , ha ! look ! he wear cruel garter . hors are tie by the 
 head , dog and bear by th ' neck , monkey by th ' loin , and men 
 by th ' leg . when a man 's over-lusti at leg , then he wear 
 wooden nether-stock . 
 lear . what 's he that hath so much thi place mistook 
 to set thee here ? 
 kent . it is both he and she- 
 your son and daughter . 
 lear . no . 
 kent . ye . 
 lear . no , i say . 
 kent . i say yea . 
 lear . no , no , they would not ! 
 kent . ye , they have . 
 lear . by jupit , i swear no ! 
 kent . by juno , i swear ay ! 
 lear . they durst not do't ; 
 they would not , could not do't . 't is wors than murther 
 to do upon respect such violent outrag . 
 resolv me with all modest hast which way 
 thou mightst deserv or they impos thi usag , 
 come from us . 
 kent . my lord , when at their home 
 i did commend your high ' letter to them , 
 ere i wa risen from the place that show 'd 
 my duti kneel , came there a reek post , 
 stew 'd in hi hast , half breathless , pant forth 
 from goneril hi mistress salut ; 
 deliv 'd letter , spite of intermiss , 
 which present they read ; on whose content , 
 they summon 'd up their meini , straight took hors , 
 command me to follow and attend 
 the leisur of their answer , gave me cold look , 
 and meet here the other messeng , 
 whose welcom i perceiv 'd had poison 'd mine- 
 be the veri fellow which of late 
 display 'd so saucili against your highness- 
 have more man than wit about me , drew . 
 he rai 'd the hous with loud and coward cri . 
 your son and daughter found thi trespass worth 
 the shame which here it suffer . 
 fool . winter 's not gone yet , if the wild gees fli that way . 
 
 father that wear rag 
 do make their children blind ; 
 but father that bear bag 
 shall see their children kind . 
 fortun , that arrant whore , 
 ne'er turn the key to th ' poor . 
 
 but for all thi , thou shalt have as mani dolour for thi 
 daughter as thou canst tell in a year . 
 lear . o , how thi mother swell up toward my heart ! 
 hysterica passio ! down , thou climb sorrow ! 
 thi element 's below ! where is thi daughter ? 
 kent . with the earl , sir , here within . 
 lear . follow me not ; 
 stay here . exit . 
 gent . made you no more offenc but what you speak of ? 
 kent . none . 
 how chanc the king come with so small a number ? 
 fool . an thou hadst been set i ' th ' stock for that question , 
 thou'dst well deserv 'd it . 
 kent . whi , fool ? 
 fool . we 'll set thee to school to an ant , to teach thee there 's no 
 labour i ' th ' winter . all that follow their nose are led by 
 their eye but blind men , and there 's not a nose among twenti 
 but can smell him that 's stink . let go thi hold when a great 
 wheel run down a hill , lest it break thi neck with follow 
 it ; but the great one that goe upward , let him draw thee after . 
 when a wise man give thee better counsel , give me mine again . i 
 would have none but knave follow it , sinc a fool give it . 
 that sir which serv and seek for gain , 
 and follow but for form , 
 will pack when it begin to rain 
 and leav thee in the storm . 
 but i will tarri ; the fool will stay , 
 and let the wise man fli . 
 the knave turn fool that run away ; 
 the fool no knave , perdi . 
 kent . where learn 'd you thi , fool ? 
 fool . not i ' th ' stock , fool . 
 
 enter lear and gloucest 
 
 lear . deni to speak with me ? they are sick ? they are weari ? 
 they have travel 'd all the night ? mere fetches- 
 the imag of revolt and fli off ! 
 fetch me a better answer . 
 glou . my dear lord , 
 you know the fieri qualiti of the duke , 
 how unremov and fix 'd he is 
 in hi own cours . 
 lear . vengeanc ! plagu ! death ! confus ! 
 fieri ? what qualiti ? whi , gloucest , gloucest , 
 i'ld speak with the duke of cornwal and hi wife . 
 glou . well , my good lord , i have inform 'd them so . 
 lear . inform 'd them ? dost thou understand me , man ? 
 glou . ay , my good lord . 
 lear . the king would speak with cornwal ; the dear father 
 would with hi daughter speak , command her servic . 
 are they inform 'd of thi ? my breath and blood ! 
 fieri ? the fieri duke ? tell the hot duke that- 
 no , but not yet ! may be he is not well . 
 infirm doth still neglect all offic 
 whereto our health is bound . we are not ourselv 
 when natur , be oppress 'd , command the mind 
 to suffer with the bodi . i 'll forbear ; 
 and am fallen out with my more headier will , 
 to take the indispo 'd and sickli fit 
 for the sound man.- death on my state ! wherefor 
 should be sit here ? thi act persuad me 
 that thi remot of the duke and her 
 is practic onli . give me my servant forth . 
 go tell the duke and 's wife i'ld speak with them- 
 now , present . bid them come forth and hear me , 
 or at their chamber door i 'll beat the drum 
 till it cri sleep to death . 
 glou . i would have all well betwixt you . exit . 
 lear . o me , my heart , my rise heart ! but down ! 
 fool . cri to it , nuncl , as the cockney did to the eel when she 
 put 'em i ' th ' past aliv . she knapp 'd 'em o ' th ' coxcomb with 
 a stick and cri 'down , wanton , down ! ' 't wa her brother that , 
 in pure kind to hi hors , butter hi hay . 
 
 enter cornwal , regan , gloucest , servant . 
 
 lear . good morrow to you both . 
 corn . hail to your grace ! 
 kent here set at liberti . 
 reg . i am glad to see your high . 
 lear . regan , i think you are ; i know what reason 
 i have to think so . if thou shouldst not be glad , 
 i would divorc me from thi mother 's tomb , 
 sepulchr an adultress . [ to kent ] o , are you free ? 
 some other time for that.- belov regan , 
 thi sister 's naught . o regan , she hath tie 
 sharp-tooth 'd unkind , like a vultur , here ! 
 [ lay hi hand on hi heart . ] 
 i can scarc speak to thee . thou'lt not believ 
 with how deprav 'd a quality- o regan ! 
 reg . i pray you , sir , take patienc . i have hope 
 you less know how to valu her desert 
 than she to scant her duti . 
 lear . say , how is that ? 
 reg . i can not think my sister in the least 
 would fail her oblig . if , sir , perchanc 
 she have restrain 'd the riot of your follow , 
 't is on such ground , and to such wholesom end , 
 as clear her from all blame . 
 lear . my curs on her ! 
 reg . o , sir , you are old ! 
 natur in you stand on the veri verg 
 of her confin . you should be rul 'd , and led 
 by some discret that discern your state 
 better than you yourself . therefor i pray you 
 that to our sister you do make return ; 
 say you have wrong 'd her , sir . 
 lear . ask her forgiv ? 
 do you but mark how thi becom the hous : 
 'dear daughter , i confess that i am old . [ kneel . ] 
 age is unnecessari . on my knee i beg 
 that you 'll vouchsaf me raiment , bed , and food . ' 
 reg . good sir , no more ! these are unsightli trick . 
 return you to my sister . 
 lear . [ rise ] never , regan ! 
 she hath abat me of half my train ; 
 look 'd black upon me ; struck me with her tongu , 
 most serpent-lik , upon the veri heart . 
 all the stor 'd vengeanc of heaven fall 
 on her ingrat top ! strike her young bone , 
 you take air , with lame ! 
 corn . fie , sir , fie ! 
 lear . you nimbl lightn , dart your blind flame 
 into her scorn eye ! infect her beauti , 
 you fen-suck 'd fog , drawn by the pow'r sun , 
 to fall and blast her pride ! 
 reg . o the blest god ! so will you wish on me 
 when the rash mood is on . 
 lear . no , regan , thou shalt never have my curs . 
 thi tender-heft natur shall not give 
 thee o'er to harsh . her eye are fierc ; but thine 
 do comfort , and not burn . 't is not in thee 
 to grudg my pleasur , to cut off my train , 
 to bandi hasti word , to scant my size , 
 and , in conclus , to oppos the bolt 
 against my come in . thou better know'st 
 the offic of natur , bond of childhood , 
 effect of courtesi , due of gratitud . 
 thi half o ' th ' kingdom hast thou not forgot , 
 wherein i thee endow 'd . 
 reg . good sir , to th ' purpos . 
 tucket within . 
 lear . who put my man i ' th ' stock ? 
 corn . what trumpet 's that ? 
 reg . i know't- my sister 's . thi approv her letter , 
 that she would soon be here . 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 is your ladi come ? 
 lear . thi is a slave , whose easy-borrow pride 
 dwell in the fickl grace of her he follow . 
 out , varlet , from my sight ! 
 corn . what mean your grace ? 
 
 enter goneril . 
 
 lear . who stock 'd my servant ? regan , i have good hope 
 thou didst not know on't.- who come here ? o heaven ! 
 if you do love old men , if your sweet sway 
 allow obedience- if yourselv are old , 
 make it your caus ! send down , and take my part ! 
 [ to goneril ] art not asham 'd to look upon thi beard ? - 
 o regan , wilt thou take her by the hand ? 
 gon . whi not by th ' hand , sir ? how have i offend ? 
 all 's not offenc that indiscret find 
 and dotag term so . 
 lear . o side , you are too tough ! 
 will you yet hold ? how came my man i ' th ' stock ? 
 corn . i set him there , sir ; but hi own disord 
 deserv 'd much less advanc . 
 lear . you ? did you ? 
 reg . i pray you , father , be weak , seem so . 
 if , till the expir of your month , 
 you will return and sojourn with my sister , 
 dismiss half your train , come then to me . 
 i am now from home , and out of that provis 
 which shall be need for your entertain . 
 lear . return to her , and fifti men dismiss 'd ? 
 no , rather i abjur all roof , and choos 
 to wage against the enmiti o ' th ' air , 
 to be a comrad with the wolf and owl- 
 necess 's sharp pinch ! return with her ? 
 whi , the hot-blood franc , that dowerless took 
 our youngest born , i could as well be brought 
 to knee hi throne , and , squire-lik , pension beg 
 to keep base life afoot . return with her ? 
 persuad me rather to be slave and sumpter 
 to thi detest groom . [ point at oswald . ] 
 gon . at your choic , sir . 
 lear . i prithe , daughter , do not make me mad . 
 i will not troubl thee , my child ; farewel . 
 we 'll no more meet , no more see one anoth . 
 but yet thou art my flesh , my blood , my daughter ; 
 or rather a diseas that 's in my flesh , 
 which i must need call mine . thou art a boil , 
 a plagu sore , an emboss carbuncl 
 in my corrupt blood . but i 'll not chide thee . 
 let shame come when it will , i do not call it . 
 i do not bid the thunder-bear shoot 
 nor tell tale of thee to high-judg jove . 
 mend when thou canst ; be better at thi leisur ; 
 i can be patient , i can stay with regan , 
 i and my hundr knight . 
 reg . not altogeth so . 
 i look 'd not for you yet , nor am provid 
 for your fit welcom . give ear , sir , to my sister ; 
 for those that mingl reason with your passion 
 must be content to think you old , and so- 
 but she know what she doe . 
 lear . is thi well spoken ? 
 reg . i dare avouch it , sir . what , fifti follow ? 
 is it not well ? what should you need of more ? 
 yea , or so mani , sith that both charg and danger 
 speak 'gainst so great a number ? how in one hous 
 should mani peopl , under two command , 
 hold amiti ? 't is hard ; almost imposs . 
 gon . whi might not you , my lord , receiv attend 
 from those that she call servant , or from mine ? 
 reg . whi not , my lord ? if then they chanc 'd to slack ye , 
 we could control them . if you will come to me 
 ( for now i spi a danger ) , i entreat you 
 to bring but five-and-twenti . to no more 
 will i give place or notic . 
 lear . i gave you all- 
 reg . and in good time you gave it ! 
 lear . made you my guardian , my depositari ; 
 but kept a reserv to be follow 
 with such a number . what , must i come to you 
 with five-and-twenti , regan ? said you so ? 
 reg . and speak't again my lord . no more with me . 
 lear . those wick creatur yet do look well-favour 'd 
 when other are more wick ; not be the worst 
 stand in some rank of prais . [ to goneril ] i 'll go with thee . 
 thi fifti yet doth doubl five-and-twenti , 
 and thou art twice her love . 
 gon . hear , me , my lord . 
 what need you five-and-twenti , ten , or five , 
 to follow in a hous where twice so mani 
 have a command to tend you ? 
 reg . what need one ? 
 lear . o , reason not the need ! our basest beggar 
 are in the poorest thing superflu . 
 allow not natur more than natur need , 
 man 's life is cheap as beast 's . thou art a ladi : 
 if onli to go warm were gorgeou , 
 whi , natur need not what thou gorgeou wear'st 
 which scarc keep thee warm . but , for true need- 
 you heaven , give me that patienc , patienc i need ! 
 you see me here , you god , a poor old man , 
 as full of grief as age ; wretch in both . 
 if it be you that stir these daughter ' heart 
 against their father , fool me not so much 
 to bear it tame ; touch me with nobl anger , 
 and let not women 's weapon , water drop , 
 stain my man 's cheek ! no , you unnatur hag ! 
 i will have such reveng on you both 
 that all the world shall- i will do such things- 
 what they are yet , i know not ; but they shall be 
 the terror of the earth ! you think i 'll weep . 
 no , i 'll not weep . 
 i have full caus of weep , but thi heart 
 shall break into a hundr thousand flaw 
 or ere i 'll weep . o fool , i shall go mad ! 
 exeunt lear , gloucest , kent , and fool . storm and 
 tempest . 
 corn . let us withdraw ; 'twill be a storm . 
 reg . thi hous is littl ; the old man and 's peopl 
 can not be well bestow 'd . 
 gon . 't is hi own blame ; hath put himself from rest 
 and must need tast hi folli . 
 reg . for hi particular , i 'll receiv him gladli , 
 but not one follow . 
 gon . so am i purpo 'd . 
 where is my lord of gloucest ? 
 corn . follow the old man forth . 
 
 enter gloucest . 
 
 he is return 'd . 
 glou . the king is in high rage . 
 corn . whither is he go ? 
 glou . he call to hors , but will i know not whither . 
 corn . 't is best to give him way ; he lead himself . 
 gon . my lord , entreat him by no mean to stay . 
 glou . alack , the night come on , and the bleak wind 
 do sore ruffl . for mani mile about 
 there 's scarc a bush . 
 reg . o , sir , to wil men 
 the injuri that they themselv procur 
 must be their schoolmast . shut up your door . 
 he is attend with a desper train , 
 and what they may incens him to , be apt 
 to have hi ear abu 'd , wisdom bid fear . 
 corn . shut up your door , my lord : 't is a wild night . 
 my regan counsel well . come out o ' th ' storm . [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 a heath . 
 
 storm still . enter kent and a gentleman at sever door . 
 
 kent . who 's there , besid foul weather ? 
 gent . one mind like the weather , most unquietli . 
 kent . i know you . where 's the king ? 
 gent . contend with the fret element ; 
 bid the wind blow the earth into the sea , 
 or swell the curl water 'bove the main , 
 that thing might chang or ceas ; tear hi white hair , 
 which the impetu blast , with eyeless rage , 
 catch in their furi and make noth of ; 
 strive in hi littl world of man to outscorn 
 the to-and-fro-conflict wind and rain . 
 thi night , wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch , 
 the lion and the belly-pinch wolf 
 keep their fur dri , unbonnet he run , 
 and bid what will take all . 
 kent . but who is with him ? 
 gent . none but the fool , who labour to outjest 
 hi heart-struck injuri . 
 kent . sir , i do know you , 
 and dare upon the warrant of my note 
 commend a dear thing to you . there is divis 
 ( although as yet the face of it be cover 'd 
 with mutual cun ) 'twixt albani and cornwal ; 
 who have ( as who have not , that their great star 
 thron 'd and set high ? ) servant , who seem no less , 
 which are to franc the spi and specul 
 intellig of our state . what hath been seen , 
 either in snuff and pack of the duke , 
 or the hard rein which both of them have born 
 against the old kind king , or someth deeper , 
 whereof , perchanc , these are but furnishings- 
 but , true it is , from franc there come a power 
 into thi scatter kingdom , who alreadi , 
 wise in our neglig , have secret feet 
 in some of our best port and are at point 
 to show their open banner . now to you : 
 if on my credit you dare build so far 
 to make your speed to dover , you shall find 
 some that will thank you , make just report 
 of how unnatur and bemad sorrow 
 the king hath caus to plain . 
 i am a gentleman of blood and breed , 
 and from some knowledg and assur offer 
 thi offic to you . 
 gent . i will talk further with you . 
 kent . no , do not . 
 for confirm that i am much more 
 than my out-wal , open thi purs and take 
 what it contain . if you shall see cordelia 
 ( as fear not but you shall ) , show her thi ring , 
 and she will tell you who your fellow is 
 that yet you do not know . fie on thi storm ! 
 i will go seek the king . 
 gent . give me your hand . have you no more to say ? 
 kent . few word , but , to effect , more than all yet : 
 that , when we have found the king ( in which your pain 
 that way , i 'll thi ) , he that first light on him 
 holla the other . 
 exeunt [ sever ] . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 anoth part of the heath . 
 
 storm still . enter lear and fool . 
 
 lear . blow , wind , and crack your cheek ! rage ! blow ! 
 you cataract and hurricano , spout 
 till you have drench 'd our steepl , drown 'd the cock ! 
 you sulph'rou and thought-execut fire , 
 vaunt-couri to oak-cleav thunderbolt , 
 sing my white head ! and thou , all-shak thunder , 
 strike flat the thick rotund o ' th ' world , 
 crack natur 's mould , all germain spill at onc , 
 that make ingrat man ! 
 fool . o nuncl , court holi water in a dri hous is better than thi 
 rain water out o ' door . good nuncl , in , and ask thi daughter 
 bless ! here 's a night piti nether wise men nor fool . 
 lear . rumbl thi belly ! spit , fire ! spout , rain ! 
 nor rain , wind , thunder , fire are my daughter . 
 i tax not you , you element , with unkind . 
 i never gave you kingdom , call 'd you children , 
 you owe me no subscript . then let fall 
 your horribl pleasur . here i stand your slave , 
 a poor , infirm , weak , and despi 'd old man . 
 but yet i call you servil minist , 
 that will with two pernici daughter join 
 your high-engend 'd battl 'gainst a head 
 so old and white as thi ! o ! o ! 't is foul ! 
 fool . he that ha a hous to put 's head in ha a good head-piec . 
 the codpiec that will hous 
 befor the head ha ani , 
 the head and he shall lous : 
 so beggar marri mani . 
 the man that make hi toe 
 what he hi heart should make 
 shall of a corn cri woe , 
 and turn hi sleep to wake . 
 for there wa never yet fair woman but she made mouth in a 
 glass . 
 
 enter kent . 
 
 lear . no , i will be the pattern of all patienc ; 
 i will say noth . 
 kent . who 's there ? 
 fool . marri , here 's grace and a codpiec ; that 's a wise man and a 
 fool . 
 kent . ala , sir , are you here ? thing that love night 
 love not such night as these . the wrath sky 
 gallow the veri wander of the dark 
 and make them keep their cave . sinc i wa man , 
 such sheet of fire , such burst of horrid thunder , 
 such groan of roar wind and rain , i never 
 rememb to have heard . man 's natur can not carri 
 th ' afflict nor the fear . 
 lear . let the great god , 
 that keep thi dread pudder o'er our head , 
 find out their enemi now . trembl , thou wretch , 
 that hast within thee undivulg crime 
 unwhipp 'd of justic . hide thee , thou bloodi hand ; 
 thou perjur 'd , and thou simular man of virtu 
 that art incestu . caitiff , in piec shake 
 that under covert and conveni seem 
 hast practi 'd on man 's life . close pent-up guilt , 
 rive your conceal contin , and cri 
 these dread summon grace . i am a man 
 more sinn 'd against than sin . 
 kent . alack , barehead ? 
 graciou my lord , hard by here is a hovel ; 
 some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest . 
 repos you there , whilst i to thi hard hous 
 ( more harder than the stone whereof 't is rai 'd , 
 which even but now , demand after you , 
 deni me to come in ) return , and forc 
 their scant courtesi . 
 lear . my wit begin to turn . 
 come on , my boy . how dost , my boy ? art cold ? 
 i am cold myself . where is thi straw , my fellow ? 
 the art of our necess is strang , 
 that can make vile thing preciou . come , your hovel . 
 poor fool and knave , i have one part in my heart 
 that 's sorri yet for thee . 
 fool . [ sing ] 
 
 he that ha and a littl tini wit- 
 with hey , ho , the wind and the rain- 
 must make content with hi fortun fit , 
 for the rain it raineth everi day . 
 
 lear . true , my good boy . come , bring us to thi hovel . 
 exeunt [ lear and kent ] . 
 fool . thi is a brave night to cool a courtesan . i 'll speak a 
 propheci ere i go : 
 when priest are more in word than matter ; 
 when brewer mar their malt with water ; 
 when nobl are their tailor ' tutor , 
 no heret burn 'd , but wench ' suitor ; 
 when everi case in law is right , 
 no squir in debt nor no poor knight ; 
 when slander do not live in tongu , 
 nor cutpurs come not to throng ; 
 when usur tell their gold i ' th ' field , 
 and bawd and whore do church build : 
 then shall the realm of albion 
 come to great confus . 
 then come the time , who live to see't , 
 that go shall be us 'd with feet . 
 thi propheci merlin shall make , for i live befor hi time . 
 exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter gloucest and edmund . 
 
 glou . alack , alack , edmund , i like not thi unnatur deal ! when 
 i desir 'd their leav that i might piti him , they took from me 
 the use of mine own hous , charg 'd me on pain of perpetu 
 displeasur neither to speak of him , entreat for him , nor ani 
 way sustain him . 
 edm . most savag and unnatur ! 
 glou . go to ; say you noth . there is divis betwixt the duke , 
 and a wors matter than that . i have receiv a letter thi 
 night- 't is danger to be spoken- i have lock 'd the letter in 
 my closet . these injuri the king now bear will be reveng 
 home ; there 's part of a power alreadi foot ; we must inclin to 
 the king . i will seek him and privili reliev him . go you and 
 maintain talk with the duke , that my chariti be not of him 
 perceiv . if he ask for me , i am ill and gone to bed . though i 
 die for't , as no less is threat'n me , the king my old master 
 must be reliev . there is some strang thing toward , edmund . 
 pray you be care . exit . 
 edm . thi courtesi , forbid thee , shall the duke 
 instantli know , and of that letter too . 
 thi seem a fair deserv , and must draw me 
 that which my father loses- no less than all . 
 the younger rise when the old doth fall . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the heath . befor a hovel . 
 
 storm still . enter lear , kent , and fool . 
 
 kent . here is the place , my lord . good my lord , enter . 
 the tyranni of the open night 's too rough 
 for natur to endur . 
 lear . let me alon . 
 kent . good my lord , enter here . 
 lear . wilt break my heart ? 
 kent . i had rather break mine own . good my lord , enter . 
 lear . thou think'st 't is much that thi contenti storm 
 invad us to the skin . so 't is to thee ; 
 but where the greater maladi is fix 'd , 
 the lesser is scarc felt . thou'dst shun a bear ; 
 but if thi flight lay toward the rage sea , 
 thou'dst meet the bear i ' th ' mouth . when the mind 's free , 
 the bodi 's delic . the tempest in my mind 
 doth from my sens take all feel els 
 save what beat there . filial ingratitud ! 
 is it not as thi mouth should tear thi hand 
 for lift food to't ? but i will punish home ! 
 no , i will weep no more . in such a night 
 'to shut me out ! pour on ; i will endur . 
 in such a night as thi ! o regan , goneril ! 
 your old kind father , whose frank heart gave all ! 
 o , that way mad lie ; let me shun that ! 
 no more of that . 
 kent . good my lord , enter here . 
 lear . prithe go in thyself ; seek thine own eas . 
 thi tempest will not give me leav to ponder 
 on thing would hurt me more . but i 'll go in . 
 [ to the fool ] in , boy ; go first.- you houseless poverty- 
 nay , get thee in . i 'll pray , and then i 'll sleep . 
 exit [ fool ] . 
 poor nake wretch , wheresoe' you are , 
 that bide the pelt of thi pitiless storm , 
 how shall your houseless head and unf side , 
 your loop 'd and window 'd ragged , defend you 
 from season such as these ? o , i have ta'en 
 too littl care of thi ! take physic , pomp ; 
 expos thyself to feel what wretch feel , 
 that thou mayst shake the superflux to them 
 and show the heaven more just . 
 edg . [ within ] fathom and half , fathom and half ! poor tom ! 
 
 enter fool [ from the hovel ] . 
 
 fool . come not in here , nuncl , here 's a spirit . help me , help me ! 
 kent . give me thi hand . who 's there ? 
 fool . a spirit , a spirit ! he say hi name 's poor tom . 
 kent . what art thou that dost grumbl there i ' th ' straw ? 
 come forth . 
 
 enter edgar [ disguis as a madman ] . 
 
 edg . away ! the foul fiend follow me ! through the sharp hawthorn 
 blow the cold wind . humh ! go to thi cold bed , and warm thee . 
 lear . hast thou given all to thi two daughter , and art thou come 
 to thi ? 
 edg . who give anyth to poor tom ? whom the foul fiend hath led 
 through fire and through flame , through ford and whirlpool , o'er 
 bog and quagmir ; that hath laid knive under hi pillow and 
 halter in hi pew , set ratsban by hi porridg , made him proud 
 of heart , to ride on a bay trot hors over four-inch 'd 
 bridg , to cours hi own shadow for a traitor . bless thi five 
 wit ! tom 's acold . o , do de , do de , do de . bless thee from 
 whirlwind , star-blast , and take ! do poor tom some chariti , 
 whom the foul fiend vex . there could i have him now- and there- 
 and there again- and there ! 
 storm still . 
 lear . what , have hi daughter brought him to thi pass ? 
 couldst thou save noth ? didst thou give 'em all ? 
 fool . nay , he reserv 'd a blanket , els we had been all sham 'd . 
 lear . now all the plagu that in the pendul air 
 hang fate o'er men 's fault light on thi daughter ! 
 kent . he hath no daughter , sir . 
 lear . death , traitor ! noth could have subdu 'd natur 
 to such a low but hi unkind daughter . 
 is it the fashion that discard father 
 should have thu littl merci on their flesh ? 
 judici punish ! 't wa thi flesh begot 
 those pelican daughter . 
 edg . pillicock sat on pillicock 's hill . 'allow , 'allow , loo , loo ! 
 fool . thi cold night will turn us all to fool and madmen . 
 edg . take heed o ' th ' foul fiend ; obey thi parent : keep thi word 
 justli ; swear not ; commit not with man 's sworn spous ; set not 
 thi sweet heart on proud array . tom 's acold . 
 lear . what hast thou been ? 
 edg . a servingman , proud in heart and mind ; that curl 'd my hair , 
 wore glove in my cap ; serv 'd the lust of my mistress ' heart and 
 did the act of dark with her ; swore as mani oath as i spake 
 word , and broke them in the sweet face of heaven ; one that 
 slept in the contriv of lust , and wak 'd to do it . wine lov 'd 
 i deepli , dice dearli ; and in woman out-paramour 'd the turk . 
 fals of heart , light of ear , bloodi of hand ; hog in sloth , fox 
 in stealth , wolf in greedi , dog in mad , lion in prey . 
 let not the creak of shoe nor the rustl of silk betray 
 thi poor heart to woman . keep thi foot out of brothel , thi hand 
 out of placket , thi pen from lender 's book , and defi the foul 
 fiend . still through the hawthorn blow the cold wind ; say 
 suum , mun , hey , no , nonni . dolphin my boy , my boy , sessa ! let 
 him trot by . 
 storm still . 
 lear . whi , thou wert better in thi grave than to answer with thi 
 uncov 'd bodi thi extrem of the sky . is man no more than 
 thi ? consid him well . thou ow'st the worm no silk , the beast 
 no hide , the sheep no wool , the cat no perfum . ha ! here 's three 
 on 's are sophist ! thou art the thing itself ; 
 unaccommod man is no more but such a poor , bare , fork 
 anim as thou art . off , off , you lend ! come , unbutton 
 here . 
 [ tear at hi cloth . ] 
 fool . prithe , nuncl , be content ! 't is a naughti night to swim 
 in . now a littl fire in a wild field were like an old lecher 's 
 heart- a small spark , all the rest on 's bodi cold . look , here 
 come a walk fire . 
 
 enter gloucest with a torch . 
 
 edg . thi is the foul fiend flibbertigibbet . he begin at curfew , 
 and walk till the first cock . he give the web and the pin , 
 squint the eye , and make the harelip ; mildew the white wheat , 
 and hurt the poor creatur of earth . 
 
 saint withold foot thrice the 'old ; 
 he met the nightmar , and her nine fold ; 
 bid her alight 
 and her troth plight , 
 and aroint thee , witch , aroint thee ! 
 
 kent . how fare your grace ? 
 lear . what 's he ? 
 kent . who 's there ? what is't you seek ? 
 glou . what are you there ? your name ? 
 edg . poor tom , that eat the swim frog , the toad , the todpol , 
 the wall-newt and the water ; that in the furi of hi heart , when 
 the foul fiend rage , eat cow-dung for sallet , swallow the 
 old rat and the ditch-dog , drink the green mantl of the 
 stand pool ; who is whipp 'd from tith to tith , and 
 stock-punish 'd and imprison 'd ; who hath had three suit to hi 
 back , six shirt to hi bodi , hors to ride , and weapon to 
 wear ; 
 
 but mice and rat , and such small deer , 
 have been tom 's food for seven long year . 
 
 bewar my follow . peac , smulkin ! peac , thou fiend ! 
 glou . what , hath your grace no better compani ? 
 edg . the princ of dark is a gentleman ! 
 modo he 's call 'd , and mahu . 
 glou . our flesh and blood is grown so vile , my lord , 
 that it doth hate what get it . 
 edg . poor tom 's acold . 
 glou . go in with me . my duti can not suffer 
 t ' obey in all your daughter ' hard command . 
 though their injunct be to bar my door 
 and let thi tyrann night take hold upon you , 
 yet have i ventur 'd to come seek you out 
 and bring you where both fire and food is readi . 
 lear . first let me talk with thi philosoph . 
 what is the caus of thunder ? 
 kent . good my lord , take hi offer ; go into th ' hous . 
 lear . i 'll talk a word with thi same learn theban . 
 what is your studi ? 
 edg . how to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin . 
 lear . let me ask you one word in privat . 
 kent . importun him onc more to go , my lord . 
 hi wit begin t ' unsettl . 
 glou . canst thou blame him ? 
 storm still . 
 hi daughter seek hi death . ah , that good kent ! 
 he said it would be thus- poor banish 'd man ! 
 thou say'st the king grow mad : i 'll tell thee , friend , 
 i am almost mad myself . i had a son , 
 now outlaw 'd from my blood . he sought my life 
 but late , veri late . i lov 'd him , friend- 
 no father hi son dearer . true to tell thee , 
 the grief hath craz 'd my wit . what a night 's thi ! 
 i do beseech your grace- 
 lear . o , cri you merci , sir . 
 nobl philosoph , your compani . 
 edg . tom 's acold . 
 glou . in , fellow , there , into th ' hovel ; keep thee warm . 
 lear . come , let 's in all . 
 kent . thi way , my lord . 
 lear . with him ! 
 i will keep still with my philosoph . 
 kent . good my lord , sooth him ; let him take the fellow . 
 glou . take him you on . 
 kent . sirrah , come on ; go along with us . 
 lear . come , good athenian . 
 glou . no word , no word ! hush . 
 edg . child rowland to the dark tower came ; 
 hi word wa still 
 
 fie , foh , and fum ! 
 i smell the blood of a british man . 
 exeunt . 
 
 scene v. 
 gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter cornwal and edmund . 
 
 corn . i will have my reveng ere i depart hi hous . 
 edm . how , my lord , i may be censur , that natur thu give way to 
 loyalti , someth fear me to think of . 
 corn . i now perceiv it wa not altogeth your brother 's evil 
 disposit made him seek hi death ; but a provok merit , set 
 awork by a reprov bad in himself . 
 edm . how malici is my fortun that i must repent to be just ! 
 thi is the letter he spoke of , which approv him an 
 intellig parti to the advantag of franc . o heaven ! that 
 thi treason were not- or not i the detector ! 
 corn . go with me to the duchess . 
 edm . if the matter of thi paper be certain , you have mighti 
 busi in hand . 
 corn . true or fals , it hath made thee earl of gloucest . 
 seek out where thi father is , that he may be readi for our 
 apprehens . 
 edm . [ asid ] if i find him comfort the king , it will stuff hi 
 suspicion more fully.- i will persev in my cours of loyalti , 
 though the conflict be sore between that and my blood . 
 corn . i will lay trust upon thee , and thou shalt find a dearer 
 father in my love . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 a farmhous near gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter gloucest , lear , kent , fool , and edgar . 
 
 glou . here is better than the open air ; take it thank . i will 
 piec out the comfort with what addit i can . i will not be 
 long from you . 
 kent . all the power of hi wit have given way to hi impati . 
 the god reward your kind ! 
 exit [ gloucest ] . 
 edg . frateretto call me , and tell me nero is an angler in the 
 lake of dark . pray , innoc , and bewar the foul fiend . 
 fool . prithe , nuncl , tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a 
 yeoman . 
 lear . a king , a king ! 
 fool . no , he 's a yeoman that ha a gentleman to hi son ; for he 's a 
 mad yeoman that see hi son a gentleman befor him . 
 lear . to have a thousand with red burn spit 
 come hizz in upon 'em- 
 edg . the foul fiend bite my back . 
 fool . he 's mad that trust in the tame of a wolf , a hors 's 
 health , a boy 's love , or a whore 's oath . 
 lear . it shall be done ; i will arraign them straight . 
 [ to edgar ] come , sit thou here , most learn justic . 
 [ to the fool ] thou , sapient sir , sit here . now , you she-fox ! 
 edg . look , where he stand and glare ! want'st thou eye at trial , 
 madam ? 
 
 come o'er the bourn , bessi , to me . 
 
 fool . her boat hath a leak , 
 and she must not speak 
 whi she dare not come over to thee . 
 
 edg . the foul fiend haunt poor tom in the voic of a nightingal . 
 hopped cri in tom 's belli for two white her . croak 
 not , black angel ; i have no food for thee . 
 kent . how do you , sir ? stand you not so amaz 'd . 
 will you lie down and rest upon the cushion ? 
 lear . i 'll see their trial first . bring in their evid . 
 [ to edgar ] thou , robe man of justic , take thi place . 
 [ to the fool ] and thou , hi yokefellow of equiti , 
 bench by hi side . [ to kent ] you are o ' th ' commiss , 
 sit you too . 
 edg . let us deal justli . 
 
 sleepest or wakest thou , jolli shepherd ? 
 thi sheep be in the corn ; 
 and for one blast of thi minikin mouth 
 thi sheep shall take no harm . 
 
 purr ! the cat is gray . 
 lear . arraign her first . 't is goneril . i here take my oath befor 
 thi honour assembl , she kick the poor king her father . 
 fool . come hither , mistress . is your name goneril ? 
 lear . she can not deni it . 
 fool . cri you merci , i took you for a joint-stool . 
 lear . and here 's anoth , whose warp 'd look proclaim 
 what store her heart is made on . stop her there ! 
 arm , arm ! sword ! fire ! corrupt in the place ! 
 fals justic , whi hast thou let her scape ? 
 edg . bless thi five wit ! 
 kent . o piti ! sir , where is the patienc now 
 that you so oft have boast to retain ? 
 edg . [ asid ] my tear begin to take hi part so much 
 they 'll mar my counterfeit . 
 lear . the littl dog and all , 
 tray , blanch , and sweetheart , see , they bark at me . 
 edg . tom will throw hi head at them . avaunt , you cur ! 
 be thi mouth or black or white , 
 tooth that poison if it bite ; 
 mastiff , greyhound , mongrel grim , 
 hound or spaniel , brach or lym , 
 bobtail tyke or trundle-tall- 
 tom will make them weep and wail ; 
 for , with throw thu my head , 
 dog leap the hatch , and all are fled . 
 do de , de , de . sessa ! come , march to wake and fair and market 
 town . poor tom , thi horn is dri . 
 lear . then let them anatom regan . see what breed about her 
 heart . is there ani caus in natur that make these hard 
 heart ? [ to edgar ] you , sir- i entertain you for one of my 
 hundr ; onli i do not like the fashion of your garment . you 'll 
 say they are persian attir ; but let them be chang 'd . 
 kent . now , good my lord , lie here and rest awhil . 
 lear . make no nois , make no nois ; draw the curtain . 
 so , so , so . we 'll go to supper i ' th ' morn . so , so , so . 
 fool . and i 'll go to bed at noon . 
 
 enter gloucest . 
 
 glou . come hither , friend . where is the king my master ? 
 kent . here , sir ; but troubl him not ; hi wit are gone . 
 glou . good friend , i prithe take him in thi arm . 
 i have o'erheard a plot of death upon him . 
 there is a litter readi ; lay him i n't 
 and drive toward dover , friend , where thou shalt meet 
 both welcom and protect . take up thi master . 
 if thou shouldst dalli half an hour , hi life , 
 with thine , and all that offer to defend him , 
 stand in assur loss . take up , take up ! 
 and follow me , that will to some provis 
 give thee quick conduct . 
 kent . oppress natur sleep . 
 thi rest might yet have balm 'd thi broken sens , 
 which , if conveni will not allow , 
 stand in hard cure . [ to the fool ] come , help to bear thi master . 
 thou must not stay behind . 
 glou . come , come , away ! 
 exeunt [ all but edgar ] . 
 edg . when we our better see bear our woe , 
 we scarc think our miseri our foe . 
 who alon suffer suffer most i ' th ' mind , 
 leav free thing and happi show behind ; 
 but then the mind much suffer doth o'erskip 
 when grief hath mate , and bear fellowship . 
 how light and portabl my pain seem now , 
 when that which make me bend make the king bow , 
 he child as i father ! tom , away ! 
 mark the high nois , and thyself bewray 
 when fals opinion , whose wrong thought defil thee , 
 in thi just proof repeal and reconcil thee . 
 what will hap more to-night , safe scape the king ! 
 lurk , lurk . [ exit . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter cornwal , regan , goneril , [ edmund the ] bastard , and servant . 
 
 corn . [ to goneril ] post speedili to my lord your husband , show him 
 thi letter . the armi of franc is landed.- seek out the traitor 
 gloucest . 
 [ exeunt some of the servant . ] 
 reg . hang him instantli . 
 gon . pluck out hi eye . 
 corn . leav him to my displeasur . edmund , keep you our sister 
 compani . the reveng we are bound to take upon your traitor 
 father are not fit for your behold . advis the duke where you 
 are go , to a most festin prepar . we are bound to the 
 like . our post shall be swift and intellig betwixt us . 
 farewel , dear sister ; farewel , my lord of gloucest . 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 how now ? where 's the king ? 
 osw . my lord of gloucest hath convey 'd him henc . 
 some five or six and thirti of hi knight , 
 hot questrist after him , met him at gate ; 
 who , with some other of the lord 's depend , 
 are gone with him toward dover , where they boast 
 to have well-arm friend . 
 corn . get hors for your mistress . 
 gon . farewel , sweet lord , and sister . 
 corn . edmund , farewel . 
 exeunt goneril , [ edmund , and oswald ] . 
 go seek the traitor gloucest , 
 pinion him like a thief , bring him befor us . 
 [ exeunt other servant . ] 
 though well we may not pass upon hi life 
 without the form of justic , yet our power 
 shall do a court'si to our wrath , which men 
 may blame , but not control . 
 
 enter gloucest , brought in by two or three . 
 
 who 's there ? the traitor ? 
 reg . ingrat fox ! 't is he . 
 corn . bind fast hi corki arm . 
 glou . what mean , your grace ? good my friend , consid 
 you are my guest . do me no foul play , friend . 
 corn . bind him , i say . 
 [ servant bind him . ] 
 reg . hard , hard . o filthi traitor ! 
 glou . unmerci ladi as you are , i am none . 
 corn . to thi chair bind him . villain , thou shalt find- 
 [ regan pluck hi beard . ] 
 glou . by the kind god , 't is most ignobl done 
 to pluck me by the beard . 
 reg . so white , and such a traitor ! 
 glou . naughti ladi , 
 these hair which thou dost ravish from my chin 
 will quicken , and accus thee . i am your host . 
 with robber 's hand my hospit favour 
 you should not ruffl thu . what will you do ? 
 corn . come , sir , what letter had you late from franc ? 
 reg . be simple-answ 'd , for we know the truth . 
 corn . and what confederaci have you with the traitor 
 late foot in the kingdom ? 
 reg . to whose hand have you sent the lunat king ? 
 speak . 
 glou . i have a letter guessingli set down , 
 which came from one that 's of a neutral heart , 
 and not from one oppo 'd . 
 corn . cun . 
 reg . and fals . 
 corn . where hast thou sent the king ? 
 glou . to dover . 
 reg . wherefor to dover ? wast thou not charg 'd at peril- 
 corn . wherefor to dover ? let him first answer that . 
 glou . i am tie to th ' stake , and i must stand the cours . 
 reg . wherefor to dover , sir ? 
 glou . becaus i would not see thi cruel nail 
 pluck out hi poor old eye ; nor thi fierc sister 
 in hi anoint flesh stick boarish fang . 
 the sea , with such a storm as hi bare head 
 in hell-black night endur 'd , would have buoy 'd up 
 and quench 'd the steel fire . 
 yet , poor old heart , he holp the heaven to rain . 
 if wolv had at thi gate howl 'd that stern time , 
 thou shouldst have said , 'good porter , turn the key . ' 
 all cruel els subscrib 'd . but i shall see 
 the wing vengeanc overtak such children . 
 corn . see't shalt thou never . fellow , hold the chair . 
 upon these eye of thine i 'll set my foot . 
 glou . he that will think to live till he be old , 
 give me some help ! - o cruel ! o ye god ! 
 reg . one side will mock anoth . th ' other too ! 
 corn . if you see vengeance- 
 < num > . serv . hold your hand , my lord ! 
 i have serv 'd you ever sinc i wa a child ; 
 but better servic have i never done you 
 than now to bid you hold . 
 reg . how now , you dog ? 
 < num > . serv . if you did wear a beard upon your chin , 
 i'ld shake it on thi quarrel . 
 reg . what do you mean ? 
 corn . my villain ! draw and fight . 
 < num > . serv . nay , then , come on , and take the chanc of anger . 
 reg . give me thi sword . a peasant stand up thu ? 
 she take a sword and run at him behind . 
 < num > . serv . o , i am slain ! my lord , you have one eye left 
 to see some mischief on him . o ! he die . 
 corn . lest it see more , prevent it . out , vile jelli ! 
 where is thi lustr now ? 
 glou . all dark and comfortless ! where 's my son edmund ? 
 edmund , enkindl all the spark of natur 
 to quit thi horrid act . 
 reg . out , treacher villain ! 
 thou call'st on him that hate thee . it wa he 
 that made the overtur of thi treason to us ; 
 who is too good to piti thee . 
 glou . o my folli ! then edgar wa abu 'd . 
 kind god , forgiv me that , and prosper him ! 
 reg . go thrust him out at gate , and let him smell 
 hi way to dover . 
 exit [ one ] with gloucest . 
 how is't , my lord ? how look you ? 
 corn . i have receiv 'd a hurt . follow me , ladi . 
 turn out that eyeless villain . throw thi slave 
 upon the dunghil . regan , i bleed apac . 
 untim come thi hurt . give me your arm . 
 exit [ cornwal , led by regan ] . 
 < num > . serv . i 'll never care what wicked i do , 
 if thi man come to good . 
 < num > . serv . if she live long , 
 and in the end meet the old cours of death , 
 women will all turn monster . 
 < num > . serv . let 's follow the old earl , and get the bedlam 
 to lead him where he would . hi roguish mad 
 allow itself to anyth . 
 < num > . serv . go thou . i 'll fetch some flax and white of egg 
 to appli to hi bleed face . now heaven help him ! 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the heath . 
 
 enter edgar . 
 
 edg . yet better thu , and known to be contemn 'd , 
 than still contemn 'd and flatter 'd . to be worst , 
 the lowest and most deject thing of fortun , 
 stand still in esper , live not in fear . 
 the lament chang is from the best ; 
 the worst return to laughter . welcom then , 
 thou unsubstanti air that i embrac ! 
 the wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst 
 owe noth to thi blast . 
 
 enter gloucest , led by an old man . 
 
 but who come here ? 
 my father , poorli led ? world , world , o world ! 
 but that thi strang mutat make us hate thee , 
 life would not yield to age . 
 old man . o my good lord , 
 i have been your tenant , and your father 's tenant , 
 these fourscor year . 
 glou . away , get thee away ! good friend , be gone . 
 thi comfort can do me no good at all ; 
 thee they may hurt . 
 old man . you can not see your way . 
 glou . i have no way , and therefor want no eye ; 
 i stumbl when i saw . full oft 't is seen 
 our mean secur us , and our mere defect 
 prove our commod . ah dear son edgar , 
 the food of thi abus father 's wrath ! 
 might i but live to see thee in my touch , 
 i'ld say i had eye again ! 
 old man . how now ? who 's there ? 
 edg . [ asid ] o god ! who is't can say ' i am at the worst ' ? 
 i am wors than e'er i wa . 
 old man . 't is poor mad tom . 
 edg . [ asid ] and wors i may be yet . the worst is not 
 so long as we can say 'thi is the worst . ' 
 old man . fellow , where goest ? 
 glou . is it a beggarman ? 
 old man . madman and beggar too . 
 glou . he ha some reason , els he could not beg . 
 i ' th ' last night 's storm i such a fellow saw , 
 which made me think a man a worm . my son 
 came then into my mind , and yet my mind 
 wa then scarc friend with him . i have heard more sinc . 
 as fli to wanton boy are we to th ' god . 
 they kill us for their sport . 
 edg . [ asid ] how should thi be ? 
 bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow , 
 ang'r itself and others.- bless thee , master ! 
 glou . is that the nake fellow ? 
 old man . ay , my lord . 
 glou . then prithe get thee gone . if for my sake 
 thou wilt o'ertak us henc a mile or twain 
 i ' th ' way toward dover , do it for ancient love ; 
 and bring some cover for thi nake soul , 
 who i 'll entreat to lead me . 
 old man . alack , sir , he is mad ! 
 glou . 't is the time 's plagu when madmen lead the blind . 
 do as i bid thee , or rather do thi pleasur . 
 abov the rest , be gone . 
 old man . i 'll bring him the best 'parel that i have , 
 come o n't what will . exit . 
 glou . sirrah nake fellow- 
 edg . poor tom 's acold . [ asid ] i can not daub it further . 
 glou . come hither , fellow . 
 edg . [ asid ] and yet i must.- bless thi sweet eye , they bleed . 
 glou . know'st thou the way to dover ? 
 edg . both stile and gate , horseway and footpath . poor tom hath been 
 scar 'd out of hi good wit . bless thee , good man 's son , from 
 the foul fiend ! five fiend have been in poor tom at onc : of 
 lust , as obidicut ; hobbidid , princ of dumb ; mahu , of 
 steal ; modo , of murder ; flibbertigibbet , of mop and 
 mow , who sinc possess chambermaid and wait women . so , 
 bless thee , master ! 
 glou . here , take thi purs , thou whom the heaven ' plagu 
 have humbl to all stroke . that i am wretch 
 make thee the happier . heaven , deal so still ! 
 let the superflu and lust-diet man , 
 that slave your ordin , that will not see 
 becaus he doe not feel , feel your pow ' r quickli ; 
 so distribut should undo excess , 
 and each man have enough . dost thou know dover ? 
 edg . ay , master . 
 glou . there is a cliff , whose high and bend head 
 look fear in the confin deep . 
 bring me but to the veri brim of it , 
 and i 'll repair the miseri thou dost bear 
 with someth rich about me . from that place 
 i shall no lead need . 
 edg . give me thi arm . 
 poor tom shall lead thee . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 befor the duke of albani 's palac . 
 
 enter goneril and [ edmund the ] bastard . 
 
 gon . welcom , my lord . i marvel our mild husband 
 not met us on the way . 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 now , where 's your master ? 
 osw . madam , within , but never man so chang 'd . 
 i told him of the armi that wa land : 
 he smil 'd at it . i told him you were come : 
 hi answer wa , 'the wors . ' of gloucest 's treacheri 
 and of the loyal servic of hi son 
 when i inform 'd him , then he call 'd me sot 
 and told me i had turn 'd the wrong side out . 
 what most he should dislik seem pleasant to him ; 
 what like , offens . 
 gon . [ to edmund ] then shall you go no further . 
 it is the cowish terror of hi spirit , 
 that dare not undertak . he 'll not feel wrong 
 which tie him to an answer . our wish on the way 
 may prove effect . back , edmund , to my brother . 
 hasten hi muster and conduct hi pow'r . 
 i must chang arm at home and give the distaff 
 into my husband 's hand . thi trusti servant 
 shall pass between us . ere long you are like to hear 
 ( if you dare ventur in your own behalf ) 
 a mistress 's command . wear thi . [ give a favour . ] 
 spare speech . 
 declin your head . thi kiss , if it durst speak , 
 would stretch thi spirit up into the air . 
 conceiv , and fare thee well . 
 edm . your in the rank of death ! exit . 
 gon . my most dear gloucest ! 
 o , the differ of man and man ! 
 to thee a woman 's servic are due ; 
 my fool usurp my bodi . 
 osw . madam , here come my lord . exit . 
 
 enter albani . 
 
 gon . i have been worth the whistl . 
 alb . o goneril , 
 you are not worth the dust which the rude wind 
 blow in your face ! i fear your disposit . 
 that natur which contemn it origin 
 can not be border certain in itself . 
 she that herself will sliver and disbranch 
 from her materi sap , perforc must wither 
 and come to deadli use . 
 gon . no more ! the text is foolish . 
 alb . wisdom and good to the vile seem vile ; 
 filth savour but themselv . what have you done ? 
 tiger , not daughter , what have you perform 'd ? 
 a father , and a graciou age man , 
 whose rever even the head-lugg 'd bear would lick , 
 most barbar , most degener , have you mad . 
 could my good brother suffer you to do it ? 
 a man , a princ , by him so benefit ! 
 if that the heaven do not their visibl spirit 
 send quickli down to tame these vile offenc , 
 it will come , 
 human must perforc prey on itself , 
 like monster of the deep . 
 gon . milk-liv 'd man ! 
 that bear'st a cheek for blow , a head for wrong ; 
 who hast not in thi brow an eye discern 
 thine honour from thi suffer ; that not know'st 
 fool do those villain piti who are punish 'd 
 ere they have done their mischief . where 's thi drum ? 
 franc spread hi banner in our noiseless land , 
 with plume helm thi state begin to threat , 
 while thou , a moral fool , sit'st still , and criest 
 'alack , whi doe he so ? ' 
 alb . see thyself , devil ! 
 proper deform seem not in the fiend 
 so horrid as in woman . 
 gon . o vain fool ! 
 alb . thou chang and self-cov 'd thing , for shame ! 
 bemonst not thi featur ! were't my fit 
 to let these hand obey my blood , 
 they are apt enough to disloc and tear 
 thi flesh and bone . howe' thou art a fiend , 
 a woman 's shape doth shield thee . 
 gon . marri , your manhood mew ! 
 
 enter a gentleman . 
 
 alb . what news ? 
 gent . o , my good lord , the duke of cornwal 's dead , 
 slain by hi servant , go to put out 
 the other eye of gloucest . 
 alb . gloucest 's eye ? 
 gent . a servant that he bred , thrill 'd with remors , 
 oppo 'd against the act , bend hi sword 
 to hi great master ; who , thereat enrag 'd , 
 flew on him , and amongst them fell 'd him dead ; 
 but not without that harm stroke which sinc 
 hath pluck 'd him after . 
 alb . thi show you are abov , 
 you justic , that these our nether crime 
 so speedili can veng ! but o poor gloucest ! 
 lose he hi other eye ? 
 gent . both , both , my lord . 
 thi letter , madam , crave a speedi answer . 
 't is from your sister . 
 gon . [ asid ] one way i like thi well ; 
 but be widow , and my gloucest with her , 
 may all the build in my fanci pluck 
 upon my hate life . anoth way 
 the news is not so tart.- i 'll read , and answer . 
 exit . 
 alb . where wa hi son when they did take hi eye ? 
 gent . come with my ladi hither . 
 alb . he is not here . 
 gent . no , my good lord ; i met him back again . 
 alb . know he the wicked ? 
 gent . ay , my good lord . 't wa he inform 'd against him , 
 and quit the hous on purpos , that their punish 
 might have the freer cours . 
 alb . gloucest , i live 
 to thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king , 
 and to reveng thine eye . come hither , friend . 
 tell me what more thou know'st . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the french camp near dover . 
 
 enter kent and a gentleman . 
 
 kent . whi the king of franc is so suddenli gone back know you the 
 reason ? 
 gent . someth he left imperfect in the state , which sinc hi 
 come forth is thought of , which import to the kingdom so much 
 fear and danger that hi person return wa most requir and 
 necessari . 
 kent . who hath he left behind him gener ? 
 gent . the marshal of franc , monsieur la far . 
 kent . did your letter pierc the queen to ani demonstr of 
 grief ? 
 gent . ay , sir . she took them , read them in my presenc , 
 and now and then an ampl tear trill 'd down 
 her delic cheek . it seem 'd she wa a queen 
 over her passion , who , most rebel-lik , 
 sought to be king o'er her . 
 kent . o , then it mov 'd her ? 
 gent . not to a rage . patienc and sorrow strove 
 who should express her goodliest . you have seen 
 sunshin and rain at onc : her smile and tear 
 were like , a better way . those happi smilet 
 that play 'd on her ripe lip seem 'd not to know 
 what guest were in her eye , which part thenc 
 as pearl from diamond dropp 'd . in brief , 
 sorrow would be a rariti most belov 'd , 
 if all could so becom it . 
 kent . made she no verbal question ? 
 gent . faith , onc or twice she heav 'd the name of father 
 pantingli forth , as if it press 'd her heart ; 
 cri 'sister , sister ! shame of ladi ! sister ! 
 kent ! father ! sister ! what , i ' th ' storm ? i ' th ' night ? 
 let piti not be believ 'd ! ' there she shook 
 the holi water from her heavenli eye , 
 and clamour moisten 'd . then away she start 
 to deal with grief alon . 
 kent . it is the star , 
 the star abov us , govern our condit ; 
 els one self mate and mate could not beget 
 such differ issu . you spoke not with her sinc ? 
 gent . no . 
 kent . wa thi befor the king return 'd ? 
 gent . no , sinc . 
 kent . well , sir , the poor distress lear 's i ' th ' town ; 
 who sometim , in hi better tune , rememb 
 what we are come about , and by no mean 
 will yield to see hi daughter . 
 gent . whi , good sir ? 
 kent . a sovereign shame so elbow him ; hi own unkind , 
 that stripp 'd her from hi benedict , turn 'd her 
 to foreign casualti , gave her dear right 
 to hi dog-heart daughters- these thing sting 
 hi mind so venom that burn shame 
 detain him from cordelia . 
 gent . alack , poor gentleman ! 
 kent . of albani 's and cornwal 's power you heard not ? 
 gent . 't is so ; they are afoot . 
 kent . well , sir , i 'll bring you to our master lear 
 and leav you to attend him . some dear caus 
 will in conceal wrap me up awhil . 
 when i am known aright , you shall not griev 
 lend me thi acquaint . i pray you go 
 along with me . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the french camp . 
 
 enter , with drum and colour , cordelia , doctor , and soldier . 
 
 cor . alack , 't is he ! whi , he wa met even now 
 as mad as the vex 'd sea , sing aloud , 
 crown 'd with rank fumit and furrow weed , 
 with hardock , hemlock , nettl , cuckoo flow'r , 
 darnel , and all the idl weed that grow 
 in our sustain corn . a centuri send forth . 
 search everi acr in the high-grown field 
 and bring him to our eye . [ exit an offic . ] what can man 's 
 wisdom 
 in the restor hi bereav sens ? 
 he that help him take all my outward worth . 
 doct . there is mean , madam . 
 our foster nurs of natur is repos , 
 the which he lack . that to provok in him 
 are mani simpl oper , whose power 
 will close the eye of anguish . 
 cor . all blest secret , 
 all you unpublish 'd virtu of the earth , 
 spring with my tear ! be aidant and remedi 
 in the good man 's distress ! seek , seek for him ! 
 lest hi ungovern 'd rage dissolv the life 
 that want the mean to lead it . 
 
 enter messeng . 
 
 mess . news , madam . 
 the british pow'r are march hitherward . 
 cor . 't is known befor . our prepar stand 
 in expect of them . o dear father , 
 it is thi busi that i go about . 
 therefor great franc 
 my mourn and import tear hath piti . 
 no blown ambit doth our arm incit , 
 but love , dear love , and our ag 'd father 's right . 
 soon may i hear and see him ! 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 gloucest 's castl . 
 
 enter regan and [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 reg . but are my brother 's pow'r set forth ? 
 osw . ay , madam . 
 reg . himself in person there ? 
 osw . madam , with much ado . 
 your sister is the better soldier . 
 reg . lord edmund spake not with your lord at home ? 
 osw . no , madam . 
 reg . what might import my sister 's letter to him ? 
 osw . i know not , ladi . 
 reg . faith , he is post henc on seriou matter . 
 it wa great ignor , gloucest 's eye be out , 
 to let him live . where he arriv he move 
 all heart against us . edmund , i think , is gone , 
 in piti of hi miseri , to dispatch 
 hi night life ; moreov , to descri 
 the strength o ' th ' enemi . 
 osw . i must need after him , madam , with my letter . 
 reg . our troop set forth to-morrow . stay with us . 
 the way are danger . 
 osw . i may not , madam . 
 my ladi charg 'd my duti in thi busi . 
 reg . whi should she write to edmund ? might not you 
 transport her purpos by word ? belik , 
 something- i know not what- i 'll love thee much- 
 let me unseal the letter . 
 osw . madam , i had rather- 
 reg . i know your ladi doe not love her husband ; 
 i am sure of that ; and at her late be here 
 she gave strang eliad and most speak look 
 to nobl edmund . i know you are of her bosom . 
 osw . i , madam ? 
 reg . i speak in understand . y'are ! i know't . 
 therefor i do advis you take thi note . 
 my lord is dead ; edmund and i have talk 'd , 
 and more conveni is he for my hand 
 than for your ladi 's . you may gather more . 
 if you do find him , pray you give him thi ; 
 and when your mistress hear thu much from you , 
 i pray desir her call her wisdom to her . 
 so farewel . 
 if you do chanc to hear of that blind traitor , 
 prefer fall on him that cut him off . 
 osw . would i could meet him , madam ! i should show 
 what parti i do follow . 
 reg . fare thee well . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 the countri near dover . 
 
 enter gloucest , and edgar [ like a peasant ] . 
 
 glou . when shall i come to th ' top of that same hill ? 
 edg . you do climb up it now . look how we labour . 
 glou . methink the ground is even . 
 edg . horribl steep . 
 hark , do you hear the sea ? 
 glou . no , truli . 
 edg . whi , then , your other sens grow imperfect 
 by your eye ' anguish . 
 glou . so may it be inde . 
 methink thi voic is alter 'd , and thou speak'st 
 in better phrase and matter than thou didst . 
 edg . y'are much deceiv 'd . in noth am i chang 'd 
 but in my garment . 
 glou . methink y'are better spoken . 
 edg . come on , sir ; here 's the place . stand still . how fear 
 and dizzi 't is to cast one 's eye so low ! 
 the crow and chough that wing the midway air 
 show scarc so gross as beetl . halfway down 
 hang one that gather sampire- dread trade ! 
 methink he seem no bigger than hi head . 
 the fishermen that walk upon the beach 
 appear like mice ; and yond tall anchor bark , 
 diminish 'd to her cock ; her cock , a buoy 
 almost too small for sight . the murmur surg 
 that on th ' unnumb'r idl pebbl chafe 
 can not be heard so high . i 'll look no more , 
 lest my brain turn , and the defici sight 
 toppl down headlong . 
 glou . set me where you stand . 
 edg . give me your hand . you are now within a foot 
 of th ' extrem verg . for all beneath the moon 
 would i not leap upright . 
 glou . let go my hand . 
 here , friend , is anoth purs ; in it a jewel 
 well worth a poor man 's take . fairi and god 
 prosper it with thee ! go thou further off ; 
 bid me farewel , and let me hear thee go . 
 edg . now fare ye well , good sir . 
 glou . with all my heart . 
 edg . [ asid ] . whi i do trifl thu with hi despair 
 is done to cure it . 
 glou . o you mighti god ! he kneel . 
 thi world i do renounc , and , in your sight , 
 shake patient my great afflict off . 
 if i could bear it longer and not fall 
 to quarrel with your great opposeless will , 
 my snuff and loath part of natur should 
 burn itself out . if edgar live , o , bless him ! 
 now , fellow , fare thee well . 
 he fall [ forward and swoon ] . 
 edg . gone , sir , farewell.- 
 and yet i know not how conceit may rob 
 the treasuri of life when life itself 
 yield to the theft . had he been where he thought , 
 by thi had thought been past.- aliv or dead ? 
 ho you , sir ! friend ! hear you , sir ? speak ! - 
 thu might he pass inde . yet he reviv . 
 what are you , sir ? 
 glou . away , and let me die . 
 edg . hadst thou been aught but gossam , feather , air , 
 so mani fadom down precipit , 
 thou'dst shiver 'd like an egg ; but thou dost breath ; 
 hast heavi substanc ; bleed'st not ; speak'st ; art sound . 
 ten mast at each make not the altitud 
 which thou hast perpendicularli fell . 
 thi life is a miracl . speak yet again . 
 glou . but have i fall'n , or no ? 
 edg . from the dread summit of thi chalki bourn . 
 look up a-height . the shrill-gorg 'd lark so far 
 can not be seen or heard . do but look up . 
 glou . alack , i have no eye ! 
 is wretched depriv 'd that benefit 
 to end itself by death ? 't wa yet some comfort 
 when miseri could beguil the tyrant 's rage 
 and frustrat hi proud will . 
 edg . give me your arm . 
 up- so . how is't ? feel you your leg ? you stand . 
 glou . too well , too well . 
 edg . thi is abov all strang . 
 upon the crown o ' th ' cliff what thing wa that 
 which part from you ? 
 glou . a poor unfortun beggar . 
 edg . as i stood here below , methought hi eye 
 were two full moon ; he had a thousand nose , 
 horn whelk 'd and wav 'd like the enridg sea . 
 it wa some fiend . therefor , thou happi father , 
 think that the clearest god , who make them honour 
 of men 's imposs , have preserv 'd thee . 
 glou . i do rememb now . henceforth i 'll bear 
 afflict till it do cri out itself 
 'enough , enough , ' and die . that thing you speak of , 
 i took it for a man . often 'twould say 
 'the fiend , the fiend'- he led me to that place . 
 edg . bear free and patient thought . 
 
 enter lear , mad , [ fantast dress with weed ] . 
 
 but who come here ? 
 the safer sens will ne'er accommod 
 hi master thu . 
 lear . no , they can not touch me for come ; 
 i am the king himself . 
 edg . o thou side-pierc sight ! 
 lear . natur 's abov art in that respect . there 's your press 
 money . that fellow handl hi bow like a crow-keep . draw me 
 a clothier 's yard . look , look , a mous ! peac , peac ; thi piec 
 of toast chees will do't . there 's my gauntlet ; i 'll prove it 
 on a giant . bring up the brown bill . o , well flown , bird ! i ' 
 th ' clout , i ' th ' clout ! hewgh ! give the word . 
 edg . sweet marjoram . 
 lear . pass . 
 glou . i know that voic . 
 lear . ha ! goneril with a white beard ? they flatter 'd me like a dog , 
 and told me i had white hair in my beard ere the black one 
 were there . to say 'ay ' and 'no ' to everyth i said ! 'ay ' and 
 'no ' too wa no good divin . when the rain came to wet me 
 onc , and the wind to make me chatter ; when the thunder would 
 not peac at my bid ; there i found 'em , there i smelt 'em 
 out . go to , they are not men o ' their word ! they told me i wa 
 everyth . 't is a lie- i am not ague-proof . 
 glou . the trick of that voic i do well rememb . 
 is't not the king ? 
 lear . ay , everi inch a king ! 
 when i do stare , see how the subject quak . 
 i pardon that man 's life . what wa thi caus ? 
 adulteri ? 
 thou shalt not die . die for adulteri ? no . 
 the wren goe to't , and the small gild fli 
 doe lecher in my sight . 
 let copul thrive ; for gloucest 's bastard son 
 wa kinder to hi father than my daughter 
 got 'tween the law sheet . 
 to't , luxuri , pell-mel ! for i lack soldier . 
 behold yond simp'r dame , 
 whose face between her fork presageth snow , 
 that minc virtu , and doe shake the head 
 to hear of pleasur 's name . 
 the fitchew nor the soil hors goe to't 
 with a more riotou appetit . 
 down from the waist they are centaur , 
 though women all abov . 
 but to the girdl do the god inherit , 
 beneath is all the fiend 's . 
 there 's hell , there 's dark , there 's the sulphur pit ; 
 burn , scald , stench , consumpt . fie , fie , fie ! pah , pah ! 
 give me an ounc of civet , good apothecari , to sweeten my 
 imagin . there 's money for thee . 
 glou . o , let me kiss that hand ! 
 lear . let me wipe it first ; it smell of mortal . 
 glou . o ruin 'd piec of natur ! thi great world 
 shall so wear out to naught . dost thou know me ? 
 lear . i rememb thine eye well enough . dost thou squini at me ? 
 no , do thi worst , blind cupid ! i 'll not love . read thou thi 
 challeng ; mark but the pen of it . 
 glou . were all the letter sun , i could not see one . 
 edg . [ asid ] i would not take thi from report . it is , 
 and my heart break at it . 
 lear . read . 
 glou . what , with the case of eye ? 
 lear . o , ho , are you there with me ? no eye in your head , nor no 
 money in your purs ? your eye are in a heavi case , your purs 
 in a light . yet you see how thi world goe . 
 glou . i see it feelingli . 
 lear . what , art mad ? a man may see how the world goe with no eye . 
 look with thine ear . see how yond justic rail upon yond 
 simpl thief . hark in thine ear . chang place and , handy-dandi , 
 which is the justic , which is the thief ? thou hast seen a 
 farmer 's dog bark at a beggar ? 
 glou . ay , sir . 
 lear . and the creatur run from the cur ? there thou mightst behold 
 the great imag of author : a dog 's obey in offic . 
 thou rascal beadl , hold thi bloodi hand ! 
 whi dost thou lash that whore ? strip thine own back . 
 thou hotli lust to use her in that kind 
 for which thou whip'st her . the usur hang the cozen . 
 through tatter 'd cloth small vice do appear ; 
 robe and furr 'd gown hide all . plate sin with gold , 
 and the strong lanc of justic hurtless break ; 
 arm it in rag , a pygmi 's straw doe pierc it . 
 none doe offend , none- i say none ! i 'll abl 'em . 
 take that of me , my friend , who have the power 
 to seal th ' accus 's lip . get thee glass eye 
 and , like a scurvi politician , seem 
 to see the thing thou dost not . now , now , now , now ! 
 pull off my boot . harder , harder ! so . 
 edg . o , matter and impertin mix 'd ! 
 reason , in mad ! 
 lear . if thou wilt weep my fortun , take my eye . 
 i know thee well enough ; thi name is gloucest . 
 thou must be patient . we came cri hither ; 
 thou know'st , the first time that we smell the air 
 we wawl and cri . i will preach to thee . mark . 
 glou . alack , alack the day ! 
 lear . when we are born , we cri that we are come 
 to thi great stage of fool . thi ' a good block . 
 it were a delic stratagem to shoe 
 a troop of hors with felt . i 'll put't in proof , 
 and when i have stol'n upon these sons-in-law , 
 then kill , kill , kill , kill , kill , kill ! 
 
 enter a gentleman [ with attend ] . 
 
 gent . o , here he is ! lay hand upon him.- sir , 
 your most dear daughter- 
 lear . no rescu ? what , a prison ? i am even 
 the natur fool of fortun . use me well ; 
 you shall have ransom . let me have a surgeon ; 
 i am cut to th ' brain . 
 gent . you shall have anyth . 
 lear . no second ? all myself ? 
 whi , thi would make a man a man of salt , 
 to use hi eye for garden waterpot , 
 ay , and lay autumn 's dust . 
 gent . good sir- 
 lear . i will die brave , like a smug bridegroom . what ! 
 i will be jovial . come , come , i am a king ; 
 my master , know you that ? 
 gent . you are a royal one , and we obey you . 
 lear . then there 's life i n't . nay , an you get it , you shall get it 
 by run . sa , sa , sa , sa ! 
 exit run . [ attend follow . ] 
 gent . a sight most piti in the meanest wretch , 
 past speak of in a king ! thou hast one daughter 
 who redeem natur from the gener curs 
 which twain have brought her to . 
 edg . hail , gentl sir . 
 gent . sir , speed you . what 's your will ? 
 edg . do you hear aught , sir , of a battl toward ? 
 gent . most sure and vulgar . everi one hear that 
 which can distinguish sound . 
 edg . but , by your favour , 
 how near 's the other armi ? 
 gent . near and on speedi foot . the main descri 
 stand on the hourli thought . 
 edg . i thank you sir . that 's all . 
 gent . though that the queen on special caus is here , 
 her armi is mov 'd on . 
 edg . i thank you , sir 
 exit [ gentleman ] . 
 glou . you ever-gentl god , take my breath from me ; 
 let not my worser spirit tempt me again 
 to die befor you pleas ! 
 edg . well pray you , father . 
 glou . now , good sir , what are you ? 
 edg . a most poor man , made tame to fortun 's blow , 
 who , by the art of known and feel sorrow , 
 am pregnant to good piti . give me your hand ; 
 i 'll lead you to some bide . 
 glou . hearti thank . 
 the bounti and the benison of heaven 
 to boot , and boot ! 
 
 enter [ oswald the ] steward . 
 
 osw . a proclaim 'd prize ! most happi ! 
 that eyeless head of thine wa first fram 'd flesh 
 to rais my fortun . thou old unhappi traitor , 
 briefli thyself rememb . the sword is out 
 that must destroy thee . 
 glou . now let thi friendli hand 
 put strength enough to't . 
 [ edgar interpos . ] 
 osw . wherefor , bold peasant , 
 dar'st thou support a publish 'd traitor ? henc ! 
 lest that th ' infect of hi fortun take 
 like hold on thee . let go hi arm . 
 edg . chill not let go , zir , without vurther 'cagion . 
 osw . let go , slave , or thou diest ! 
 edg . good gentleman , go your gait , and let poor voke pass . an chud 
 ha ' bin zwagger 'd out of my life , 'twould not ha ' bin zo long as 
 't is by a vortnight . nay , come not near th ' old man . keep out , 
 che vore ye , or ise tri whether your costard or my ballow be the 
 harder . chill be plain with you . 
 osw . out , dunghil ! 
 they fight . 
 edg . chill pick your teeth , zir . come ! no matter vor your foin . 
 [ oswald fall . ] 
 osw . slave , thou hast slain me . villain , take my purs . 
 if ever thou wilt thrive , buri my bodi , 
 and give the letter which thou find'st about me 
 to edmund earl of gloucest . seek him out 
 upon the british parti . o , untim death ! death ! 
 he die . 
 edg . i know thee well . a servic villain , 
 as duteou to the vice of thi mistress 
 as bad would desir . 
 glou . what , is he dead ? 
 edg . sit you down , father ; rest you . 
 let 's see hi pocket ; these letter that he speak of 
 may be my friend . he 's dead . i am onli sorri 
 he had no other deathsman . let us see . 
 leav , gentl wax ; and , manner , blame us not . 
 to know our enemi ' mind , we'ld rip their heart ; 
 their paper , is more law . read the letter . 
 
 'let our reciproc vow be rememb'r . you have mani 
 opportun to cut him off . if your will want not , time and 
 place will be fruit offer 'd . there is noth done , if he 
 return the conqueror . then am i the prison , and hi bed my 
 jail ; from the loath warmth whereof deliv me , and suppli the 
 place for your labour . 
 'your ( wife , so i would say ) affection servant , 
 'goneril . ' 
 
 o indistinguish 'd space of woman 's will ! 
 a plot upon her virtuou husband 's life , 
 and the exchang my brother ! here in the sand 
 thee i 'll rake up , the post unsanctifi 
 of murther lecher ; and in the matur time 
 with thi ungraci paper strike the sight 
 of the death-practi 'd duke , for him 't is well 
 that of thi death and busi i can tell . 
 glou . the king is mad . how stiff is my vile sens , 
 that i stand up , and have ingeni feel 
 of my huge sorrow ! better i were distract . 
 so should my thought be sever 'd from my grief , 
 and woe by wrong imagin lose 
 the knowledg of themselv . 
 a drum afar off . 
 edg . give me your hand . 
 far off methink i hear the beaten drum . 
 come , father , i 'll bestow you with a friend . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 a tent in the french camp . 
 
 enter cordelia , kent , doctor , and gentleman . 
 
 cor . o thou good kent , how shall i live and work 
 to match thi good ? my life will be too short 
 and everi measur fail me . 
 kent . to be acknowledg 'd , madam , is o'erpaid . 
 all my report go with the modest truth ; 
 nor more nor clipp 'd , but so . 
 cor . be better suit . 
 these weed are memori of those worser hour . 
 i prithe put them off . 
 kent . pardon , dear madam . 
 yet to be known shorten my made intent . 
 my boon i make it that you know me not 
 till time and i think meet . 
 cor . then be't so , my good lord . [ to the doctor ] how , doe the king ? 
 doct . madam , sleep still . 
 cor . o you kind god , 
 cure thi great breach in hi abus natur ! 
 th ' untun 'd and jar sens , o , wind up 
 of thi child-chang father ! 
 doct . so pleas your majesti 
 that we may wake the king ? he hath slept long . 
 cor . be govern 'd by your knowledg , and proceed 
 i ' th ' sway of your own will . is he array 'd ? 
 
 enter lear in a chair carri by servant . 
 
 gent . ay , madam . in the heavi of sleep 
 we put fresh garment on him . 
 doct . be by , good madam , when we do awak him . 
 i doubt not of hi temper . 
 cor . veri well . 
 music . 
 doct . pleas you draw near . louder the music there ! 
 cor . o my dear father , restor hang 
 thi medicin on my lip , and let thi kiss 
 repair those violent harm that my two sister 
 have in thi rever made ! 
 kent . kind and dear princess ! 
 cor . had you not been their father , these white flake 
 had challeng 'd piti of them . wa thi a face 
 to be oppo 'd against the war wind ? 
 to stand against the deep dread-bolt thunder ? 
 in the most terribl and nimbl stroke 
 of quick cross lightn ? to watch- poor perdu ! - 
 with thi thin helm ? mine enemi 's dog , 
 though he had bit me , should have stood that night 
 against my fire ; and wast thou fain , poor father , 
 to hovel thee with swine and rogu forlorn , 
 in short and musti straw ? alack , alack ! 
 't is wonder that thi life and wit at onc 
 had not conclud all.- he wake . speak to him . 
 doct . madam , do you ; 't is fittest . 
 cor . how doe my royal lord ? how fare your majesti ? 
 lear . you do me wrong to take me out o ' th ' grave . 
 thou art a soul in bliss ; but i am bound 
 upon a wheel of fire , that mine own tear 
 do scald like molten lead . 
 cor . sir , do you know me ? 
 lear . you are a spirit , i know . when did you die ? 
 cor . still , still , far wide ! 
 doct . he 's scarc awak . let him alon awhil . 
 lear . where have i been ? where am i ? fair daylight , 
 i am mightili abu 'd . i should e'en die with piti , 
 to see anoth thu . i know not what to say . 
 i will not swear these are my hand . let 's see . 
 i feel thi pin prick . would i were assur 'd 
 of my condit ! 
 cor . o , look upon me , sir , 
 and hold your hand in benedict o'er me . 
 no , sir , you must not kneel . 
 lear . pray , do not mock me . 
 i am a veri foolish fond old man , 
 fourscor and upward , not an hour more nor less ; 
 and , to deal plainli , 
 i fear i am not in my perfect mind . 
 methink i should know you , and know thi man ; 
 yet i am doubt ; for i am mainli ignor 
 what place thi is ; and all the skill i have 
 rememb not these garment ; nor i know not 
 where i did lodg last night . do not laugh at me ; 
 for ( as i am a man ) i think thi ladi 
 to be my child cordelia . 
 cor . and so i am ! i am ! 
 lear . be your tear wet ? ye , faith . i pray weep not . 
 if you have poison for me , i will drink it . 
 i know you do not love me ; for your sister 
 have , as i do rememb , done me wrong . 
 you have some caus , they have not . 
 cor . no caus , no caus . 
 lear . am i in franc ? 
 kent . in your own kingdom , sir . 
 lear . do not abus me . 
 doct . be comfort , good madam . the great rage 
 you see is kill 'd in him ; and yet it is danger 
 to make him even o'er the time he ha lost . 
 desir him to go in . troubl him no more 
 till further settl . 
 cor . will't pleas your high walk ? 
 lear . you must bear with me . 
 pray you now , forget and forgiv . i am old and foolish . 
 exeunt . manent kent and gentleman . 
 gent . hold it true , sir , that the duke of cornwal wa so slain ? 
 kent . most certain , sir . 
 gent . who is conductor of hi peopl ? 
 kent . as 't is said , the bastard son of gloucest . 
 gent . they say edgar , hi banish 'd son , is with the earl of kent 
 in germani . 
 kent . report is changeabl . 't is time to look about ; the power of 
 the kingdom approach apac . 
 gent . the arbitr is like to be bloodi . 
 fare you well , sir . [ exit . ] 
 kent . my point and period will be throughli wrought , 
 or well or ill , as thi day 's battl 's fought . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the british camp near dover . 
 
 enter , with drum and colour , edmund , regan , gentleman , and soldier . 
 
 edm . know of the duke if hi last purpos hold , 
 or whether sinc he is advi 'd by aught 
 to chang the cours . he 's full of alter 
 and self-reprov . bring hi constant pleasur . 
 [ exit an offic . ] 
 reg . our sister 's man is certainli miscarri . 
 edm . ti to be doubt , madam . 
 reg . now , sweet lord , 
 you know the good i intend upon you . 
 tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth- 
 do you not love my sister ? 
 edm . in honour 'd love . 
 reg . but have you never found my brother 's way 
 to the forfend place ? 
 edm . that thought abus you . 
 reg . i am doubt that you have been conjunct 
 and bosom 'd with her , as far as we call her . 
 edm . no , by mine honour , madam . 
 reg . i never shall endur her . dear my lord , 
 be not familiar with her . 
 edm . fear me not . 
 she and the duke her husband ! 
 
 enter , with drum and colour , albani , goneril , soldier . 
 
 gon . [ asid ] i had rather lose the battl than that sister 
 should loosen him and me . 
 alb . our veri love sister , well bemet . 
 sir , thi i hear : the king is come to hi daughter , 
 with other whom the rigour of our state 
 forc 'd to cri out . where i could not be honest , 
 i never yet wa valiant . for thi busi , 
 it toucheth us as franc invad our land , 
 not bold the king , with other whom , i fear , 
 most just and heavi caus make oppos . 
 edm . sir , you speak nobli . 
 reg . whi is thi reason 'd ? 
 gon . combin togeth 'gainst the enemi ; 
 for these domest and particular broil 
 are not the question here . 
 alb . let 's then determin 
 with th ' ancient of war on our proceed . 
 edm . i shall attend you present at your tent . 
 reg . sister , you 'll go with us ? 
 gon . no . 
 reg . 't is most conveni . pray you go with us . 
 gon . [ asid ] o , ho , i know the riddle.- i will go . 
 
 [ as they are go out , ] enter edgar [ disguis ] . 
 
 edg . if e'er your grace had speech with man so poor , 
 hear me one word . 
 alb . i 'll overtak you.- speak . 
 exeunt [ all but albani and edgar ] . 
 edg . befor you fight the battl , ope thi letter . 
 if you have victori , let the trumpet sound 
 for him that brought it . wretch though i seem , 
 i can produc a champion that will prove 
 what is avouch there . if you miscarri , 
 your busi of the world hath so an end , 
 and machin ceas . fortun love you ! 
 alb . stay till i have read the letter . 
 edg . i wa forbid it . 
 when time shall serv , let but the herald cri , 
 and i 'll appear again . 
 alb . whi , fare thee well . i will o'erlook thi paper . 
 exit [ edgar ] . 
 
 enter edmund . 
 
 edm . the enemi 's in view ; draw up your power . 
 here is the guess of their true strength and forc 
 by dilig discoveri ; but your hast 
 is now urg 'd on you . 
 alb . we will greet the time . exit . 
 edm . to both these sister have i sworn my love ; 
 each jealou of the other , as the stung 
 are of the adder . which of them shall i take ? 
 both ? one ? or neither ? neither can be enjoy 'd , 
 if both remain aliv . to take the widow 
 exasper , make mad her sister goneril ; 
 and hardli shall i carri out my side , 
 her husband be aliv . now then , we 'll use 
 hi counten for the battl , which be done , 
 let her who would be rid of him devis 
 hi speedi take off . as for the merci 
 which he intend to lear and to cordelia- 
 the battl done , and they within our power , 
 shall never see hi pardon ; for my state 
 stand on me to defend , not to debat . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a field between the two camp . 
 
 alarum within . enter , with drum and colour , the power of franc 
 over the stage , cordelia with her father in her hand , and exeunt . 
 
 enter edgar and gloucest . 
 
 edg . here , father , take the shadow of thi tree 
 for your good host . pray that the right may thrive . 
 if ever i return to you again , 
 i 'll bring you comfort . 
 glou . grace go with you , sir ! 
 exit [ edgar ] . 
 
 alarum and retreat within . enter edgar , 
 
 edg . away , old man ! give me thi hand ! away ! 
 king lear hath lost , he and hi daughter ta'en . 
 give me thi hand ! come on ! 
 glou . no further , sir . a man may rot even here . 
 edg . what , in ill thought again ? men must endur 
 their go henc , even as their come hither ; 
 ripe is all . come on . 
 glou . and that 's true too . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the british camp , near dover . 
 
 enter , in conquest , with drum and colour , edmund ; lear and cordelia 
 as prison ; soldier , captain . 
 
 edm . some offic take them away . good guard 
 until their greater pleasur first be known 
 that are to censur them . 
 cor . we are not the first 
 who with best mean have incurr 'd the worst . 
 for thee , oppress king , am i cast down ; 
 myself could els outfrown fals fortun 's frown . 
 shall we not see these daughter and these sister ? 
 lear . no , no , no , no ! come , let 's away to prison . 
 we two alon will sing like bird i ' th ' cage . 
 when thou dost ask me bless , i 'll kneel down 
 and ask of thee forgiv . so we 'll live , 
 and pray , and sing , and tell old tale , and laugh 
 at gild butterfli , and hear poor rogu 
 talk of court news ; and we 'll talk with them too- 
 who lose and who win ; who 's in , who 's out- 
 and take upon 's the mysteri of thing , 
 as if we were god 's spi ; and we 'll wear out , 
 in a wall 'd prison , pack and sect of great one 
 that ebb and flow by th ' moon . 
 edm . take them away . 
 lear . upon such sacrific , my cordelia , 
 the god themselv throw incens . have i caught thee ? 
 he that part us shall bring a brand from heaven 
 and fire us henc like fox . wipe thine eye . 
 the goodyear shall devour 'em , flesh and fell , 
 ere they shall make us weep ! we 'll see 'em starv 'd first . 
 come . exeunt [ lear and cordelia , guard ] . 
 edm . come hither , captain ; hark . 
 take thou thi note [ give a paper ] . go follow them to prison . 
 one step i have advanc 'd thee . if thou dost 
 as thi instruct thee , thou dost make thi way 
 to nobl fortun . know thou thi , that men 
 are as the time is . to be tender-mind 
 doe not becom a sword . thi great employ 
 will not bear question . either say thou'lt do't , 
 or thrive by other mean . 
 capt . i 'll do't , my lord . 
 edm . about it ! and write happi when th ' hast done . 
 mark- i say , instantli ; and carri it so 
 as i have set it down . 
 capt . i can not draw a cart , nor eat dri oat ; 
 if it be man 's work , i 'll do't . exit . 
 
 flourish . enter albani , goneril , regan , soldier . 
 
 alb . sir , you have show 'd to-day your valiant strain , 
 and fortun led you well . you have the captiv 
 who were the opposit of thi day 's strife . 
 we do requir them of you , so to use them 
 as we shall find their merit and our safeti 
 may equal determin . 
 edm . sir , i thought it fit 
 to send the old and miser king 
 to some retent and appoint guard ; 
 whose age ha charm in it , whose titl more , 
 to pluck the common bosom on hi side 
 and turn our impress 'd lanc in our eye 
 which do command them . with him i sent the queen , 
 my reason all the same ; and they are readi 
 to-morrow , or at further space , t ' appear 
 where you shall hold your session . at thi time 
 we sweat and bleed : the friend hath lost hi friend ; 
 and the best quarrel , in the heat , are cur 'd 
 by those that feel their sharp . 
 the question of cordelia and her father 
 requir a fitter place . 
 alb . sir , by your patienc , 
 i hold you but a subject of thi war , 
 not as a brother . 
 reg . that 's as we list to grace him . 
 methink our pleasur might have been demand 
 ere you had spoke so far . he led our power , 
 bore the commiss of my place and person , 
 the which immediaci may well stand up 
 and call itself your brother . 
 gon . not so hot ! 
 in hi own grace he doth exalt himself 
 more than in your addit . 
 reg . in my right 
 by me invest , he compeer the best . 
 gon . that were the most if he should husband you . 
 reg . jester do oft prove prophet . 
 gon . holla , holla ! 
 that eye that told you so look 'd but asquint . 
 reg . ladi , i am not well ; els i should answer 
 from a full-flow stomach . gener , 
 take thou my soldier , prison , patrimoni ; 
 dispos of them , of me ; the wall are thine . 
 wit the world that i creat thee here 
 my lord and master . 
 gon . mean you to enjoy him ? 
 alb . the let-alon lie not in your good will . 
 edm . nor in thine , lord . 
 alb . half-blood fellow , ye . 
 reg . [ to edmund ] let the drum strike , and prove my titl thine . 
 alb . stay yet ; hear reason . edmund , i arrest thee 
 on capit treason ; and , in thine attaint , 
 thi gild serpent [ point to goneril ] . for your claim , fair 
 sister , 
 i bar it in the interest of my wife . 
 't is she is subcontract to thi lord , 
 and i , her husband , contradict your bane . 
 if you will marri , make your love to me ; 
 my ladi is bespok . 
 gon . an interlud ! 
 alb . thou art arm 'd , gloucest . let the trumpet sound . 
 if none appear to prove upon thi person 
 thi heinou , manifest , and mani treason , 
 there is my pledg [ throw down a glove ] ! i 'll prove it on thi 
 heart , 
 ere i tast bread , thou art in noth less 
 than i have here proclaim 'd thee . 
 reg . sick , o , sick ! 
 gon . [ asid ] if not , i 'll ne'er trust medicin . 
 edm . there 's my exchang [ throw down a glove ] . what in the world 
 he is 
 that name me traitor , villain-lik he lie . 
 call by thi trumpet . he that dare approach , 
 on him , on you , who not ? i will maintain 
 my truth and honour firmli . 
 alb . a herald , ho ! 
 edm . a herald , ho , a herald ! 
 alb . trust to thi singl virtu ; for thi soldier , 
 all levi in my name , have in my name 
 took their discharg . 
 reg . my sick grow upon me . 
 alb . she is not well . convey her to my tent . 
 [ exit regan , led . ] 
 
 enter a herald . 
 
 come hither , herald . let the trumpet sound , 
 and read out thi . 
 capt . sound , trumpet ! a trumpet sound . 
 
 her . ( read ) 'if ani man of qualiti or degre within the list of 
 the armi will maintain upon edmund , suppos earl of gloucest , 
 that he is a manifold traitor , let him appear by the third sound 
 of the trumpet . he is bold in hi defenc . ' 
 
 edm . sound ! first trumpet . 
 her . again ! second trumpet . 
 her . again ! third trumpet . 
 trumpet answer within . 
 
 enter edgar , arm , at the third sound , a trumpet befor him . 
 
 alb . ask him hi purpos , whi he appear 
 upon thi call o ' th ' trumpet . 
 her . what are you ? 
 your name , your qualiti ? and whi you answer 
 thi present summon ? 
 edg . know my name is lost ; 
 by treason 's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit . 
 yet am i nobl as the adversari 
 i come to cope . 
 alb . which is that adversari ? 
 edg . what 's he that speak for edmund earl of gloucest ? 
 edm . himself . what say'st thou to him ? 
 edg . draw thi sword , 
 that , if my speech offend a nobl heart , 
 thi arm may do thee justic . here is mine . 
 behold , it is the privileg of mine honour , 
 my oath , and my profess . i protest- 
 maugr thi strength , youth , place , and emin , 
 despit thi victor sword and fire-new fortun , 
 thi valour and thi heart- thou art a traitor ; 
 fals to thi god , thi brother , and thi father ; 
 conspir 'gainst thi high illustri princ ; 
 and from th ' extremest upward of thi head 
 to the descent and dust beneath thi foot , 
 a most toad-spot traitor . say thou 'no , ' 
 thi sword , thi arm , and my best spirit are bent 
 to prove upon thi heart , whereto i speak , 
 thou liest . 
 edm . in wisdom i should ask thi name ; 
 but sinc thi outsid look so fair and warlik , 
 and that thi tongu some say of breed breath , 
 what safe and nice i might well delay 
 by rule of knighthood , i disdain and spurn . 
 back do i toss those treason to thi head ; 
 with the hell-hat lie o'erwhelm thi heart ; 
 which- for they yet glanc by and scarc bruise- 
 thi sword of mine shall give them instant way 
 where they shall rest for ever . trumpet , speak ! 
 alarum . fight . [ edmund fall . ] 
 alb . save him , save him ! 
 gon . thi is mere practic , gloucest . 
 by th ' law of arm thou wast not bound to answer 
 an unknown opposit . thou art not vanquish 'd , 
 but cozen 'd and beguil 'd . 
 alb . shut your mouth , dame , 
 or with thi paper shall i stop it . [ show her her letter to 
 edmund . ] - [ to edmund ] . hold , sir . 
 [ to goneril ] thou wors than ani name , read thine own evil . 
 no tear , ladi ! i perceiv you know it . 
 gon . say if i do- the law are mine , not thine . 
 who can arraign me for't ? 
 alb . most monstrou ! 
 know'st thou thi paper ? 
 gon . ask me not what i know . exit . 
 alb . go after her . she 's desper ; govern her . 
 [ exit an offic . ] 
 edm . what , you have charg 'd me with , that have i done , 
 and more , much more . the time will bring it out . 
 't is past , and so am i.- but what art thou 
 that hast thi fortun on me ? if thou'rt nobl , 
 i do forgiv thee . 
 edg . let 's exchang chariti . 
 i am no less in blood than thou art , edmund ; 
 if more , the more th ' hast wrong 'd me . 
 my name is edgar and thi father 's son . 
 the god are just , and of our pleasant vice 
 make instrument to scourg us . 
 the dark and viciou place where thee he got 
 cost him hi eye . 
 edm . th ' hast spoken right ; 't is true . 
 the wheel is come full circl ; i am here . 
 alb . methought thi veri gait did prophesi 
 a royal nobl . i must embrac thee . 
 let sorrow split my heart if ever i 
 did hate thee , or thi father ! 
 edg . worthi princ , i know't . 
 alb . where have you hid yourself ? 
 how have you known the miseri of your father ? 
 edg . by nurs them , my lord . list a brief tale ; 
 and when 't is told , o that my heart would burst ! 
 the bloodi proclam to escap 
 that follow 'd me so near ( o , our live ' sweet ! 
 that with the pain of death would hourli die 
 rather than die at onc ! ) taught me to shift 
 into a madman 's rag , t ' assum a semblanc 
 that veri dog disdain 'd ; and in thi habit 
 met i my father with hi bleed ring , 
 their preciou stone new lost ; becam hi guid , 
 led him , begg 'd for him , sav 'd him from despair ; 
 never ( o fault ! ) reveal 'd myself unto him 
 until some half hour past , when i wa arm 'd , 
 not sure , though hope of thi good success , 
 i ask 'd hi bless , and from first to last 
 told him my pilgrimag . but hi flaw 'd heart 
 ( alack , too weak the conflict to support ! ) 
 'twixt two extrem of passion , joy and grief , 
 burst smilingli . 
 edm . thi speech of your hath mov 'd me , 
 and shall perchanc do good ; but speak you on ; 
 you look as you had someth more to say . 
 alb . if there be more , more woful , hold it in ; 
 for i am almost readi to dissolv , 
 hear of thi . 
 edg . thi would have seem 'd a period 
 to such as love not sorrow ; but anoth , 
 to amplifi too much , would make much more , 
 and top extrem . 
 whilst i wa big in clamour , came there a man , 
 who , have seen me in my worst estat , 
 shunn 'd my abhorr 'd societi ; but then , find 
 who 't wa that so endur 'd , with hi strong arm 
 he fasten on my neck , and bellow out 
 as he 'd burst heaven ; threw him on my father ; 
 told the most piteou tale of lear and him 
 that ever ear receiv 'd ; which in recount 
 hi grief grew puissant , and the string of life 
 began to crack . twice then the trumpet sound , 
 and there i left him tranc 'd . 
 alb . but who wa thi ? 
 edg . kent , sir , the banish 'd kent ; who in disguis 
 follow hi enemi king and did him servic 
 improp for a slave . 
 
 enter a gentleman with a bloodi knife . 
 
 gent . help , help ! o , help ! 
 edg . what kind of help ? 
 alb . speak , man . 
 edg . what mean that bloodi knife ? 
 gent . 't is hot , it smoke . 
 it came even from the heart of- o ! she 's dead ! 
 alb . who dead ? speak , man . 
 gent . your ladi , sir , your ladi ! and her sister 
 by her is poison ; she hath confess 'd it . 
 edm . i wa contract to them both . all three 
 now marri in an instant . 
 
 enter kent . 
 
 edg . here come kent . 
 alb . produc their bodi , be they aliv or dead . 
 [ exit gentleman . ] 
 thi judgement of the heaven , that make us trembl 
 touch us not with piti . o , is thi he ? 
 the time will not allow the compliment 
 that veri manner urg . 
 kent . i am come 
 to bid my king and master aye good night . 
 is he not here ? 
 alb . great thing of us forgot ! 
 speak , edmund , where 's the king ? and where 's cordelia ? 
 the bodi of goneril and regan are brought in . 
 seest thou thi object , kent ? 
 kent . alack , whi thu ? 
 edm . yet edmund wa belov 'd . 
 the one the other poison for my sake , 
 and after slew herself . 
 alb . even so . cover their face . 
 edm . i pant for life . some good i mean to do , 
 despit of mine own natur . quickli send 
 ( be brief i n't ) to the castl ; for my writ 
 is on the life of lear and on cordelia . 
 nay , send in time . 
 alb . run , run , o , run ! 
 edg . to who , my lord ? who ha the offic ? send 
 thi token of repriev . 
 edm . well thought on . take my sword ; 
 give it the captain . 
 alb . hast thee for thi life . [ exit edgar . ] 
 edm . he hath commiss from thi wife and me 
 to hang cordelia in the prison and 
 to lay the blame upon her own despair 
 that she fordid herself . 
 alb . the god defend her ! bear him henc awhil . 
 [ edmund is born off . ] 
 
 enter lear , with cordelia [ dead ] in hi arm , [ edgar , captain , 
 and other follow ] . 
 
 lear . howl , howl , howl , howl ! o , you are men of stone . 
 had i your tongu and eye , i'ld use them so 
 that heaven 's vault should crack . she 's gone for ever ! 
 i know when one is dead , and when one live . 
 she 's dead as earth . lend me a look glass . 
 if that her breath will mist or stain the stone , 
 whi , then she live . 
 kent . is thi the promi 'd end ? 
 edg . or imag of that horror ? 
 alb . fall and ceas ! 
 lear . thi feather stir ; she live ! if it be so , 
 it is a chanc which doe redeem all sorrow 
 that ever i have felt . 
 kent . o my good master ! 
 lear . prithe away ! 
 edg . 't is nobl kent , your friend . 
 lear . a plagu upon you , murder , traitor all ! 
 i might have sav 'd her ; now she 's gone for ever ! 
 cordelia , cordelia ! stay a littl . ha ! 
 what is't thou say'st , her voic wa ever soft , 
 gentl , and low- an excel thing in woman . 
 i kill 'd the slave that wa a-hang thee . 
 capt . 't is true , my lord , he did . 
 lear . did i not , fellow ? 
 i have seen the day , with my good bite falchion 
 i would have made them skip . i am old now , 
 and these same cross spoil me . who are you ? 
 mine eye are not o ' th ' best . i 'll tell you straight . 
 kent . if fortun brag of two she lov 'd and hate , 
 one of them we behold . 
 lear . thi ' a dull sight . are you not kent ? 
 kent . the same- 
 your servant kent . where is your servant caiu ? 
 lear . he 's a good fellow , i can tell you that . 
 he 'll strike , and quickli too . he 's dead and rotten . 
 kent . no , my good lord ; i am the veri man- 
 lear . i 'll see that straight . 
 kent . that from your first of differ and decay 
 have follow your sad step . 
 lear . you 're welcom hither . 
 kent . nor no man els ! all 's cheerless , dark , and deadli . 
 your eldest daughter have fordon themselv , 
 and desper are dead . 
 lear . ay , so i think . 
 alb . he know not what he say ; and vain is it 
 that we present us to him . 
 edg . veri bootless . 
 
 enter a captain . 
 
 capt . edmund is dead , my lord . 
 alb . that 's but a trifl here . 
 you lord and nobl friend , know our intent . 
 what comfort to thi great decay may come 
 shall be appli . for us , we will resign , 
 dure the life of thi old majesti , 
 to him our absolut power ; [ to edgar and kent ] you to your 
 right ; 
 with boot , and such addit as your honour 
 have more than merited.- all friend shall tast 
 the wage of their virtu , and all foe 
 the cup of their deservings.- o , see , see ! 
 lear . and my poor fool is hang 'd ! no , no , no life ! 
 whi should a dog , a hors , a rat , have life , 
 and thou no breath at all ? thou'lt come no more , 
 never , never , never , never , never ! 
 pray you undo thi button . thank you , sir . 
 do you see thi ? look on her ! look ! her lip ! 
 look there , look there ! he die . 
 edg . he faint ! my lord , my lord ! 
 kent . break , heart ; i prithe break ! 
 edg . look up , my lord . 
 kent . vex not hi ghost . o , let him pass ! he hate him 
 that would upon the rack of thi tough world 
 stretch him out longer . 
 edg . he is gone inde . 
 kent . the wonder is , he hath endur 'd so long . 
 he but usurp 'd hi life . 
 alb . bear them from henc . our present busi 
 is gener woe . [ to kent and edgar ] friend of my soul , you 
 twain 
 rule in thi realm , and the gor 'd state sustain . 
 kent . i have a journey , sir , shortli to go . 
 my master call me ; i must not say no . 
 alb . the weight of thi sad time we must obey , 
 speak what we feel , not what we ought to say . 
 the oldest have born most ; we that are young 
 shall never see so much , nor live so long . 
 exeunt with a dead march . 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 love 's labour 's lost 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 king henri the eighth 
 cardin wolsey cardin campeiu 
 capuciu , ambassador from the emperor charl v 
 cranmer , archbishop of canterburi 
 duke of norfolk duke of buckingham 
 duke of suffolk earl of surrey 
 lord chamberlain lord chancellor 
 gardin , bishop of winchest 
 bishop of lincoln lord abergavenni 
 lord sandi sir henri guildford 
 sir thoma lovel sir anthoni denni 
 sir nichola vaux secretari to wolsey 
 cromwel , servant to wolsey 
 griffith , gentleman-ush to queen katharin 
 three gentlemen 
 doctor butt , physician to the king 
 garter king-at-arm 
 surveyor to the duke of buckingham 
 brandon , and a sergeant-at-arm 
 doorkeep of the council chamber 
 porter , and hi man page to gardin 
 a crier 
 
 queen katharin , wife to king henri , afterward divorc 
 ann bullen , her maid of honour , afterward queen 
 an old ladi , friend to ann bullen 
 patienc , woman to queen katharin 
 
 lord mayor , aldermen , lord and ladi in the dumb 
 show ; women attend upon the queen ; scribe , 
 offic , guard , and other attend ; spirit 
 
 scene : 
 
 london ; westminst ; kimbolton 
 
 
 
 king henri the eighth 
 
 the prologu . 
 
 i come no more to make you laugh ; thing now 
 that bear a weighti and a seriou brow , 
 sad , high , and work , full of state and woe , 
 such nobl scene as draw the eye to flow , 
 we now present . those that can piti here 
 may , if they think it well , let fall a tear : 
 the subject will deserv it . such as give 
 their money out of hope they may believ 
 may here find truth too . those that come to see 
 onli a show or two , and so agre 
 the play may pass , if they be still and will , 
 i 'll undertak may see away their shill 
 richli in two short hour . onli they 
 that come to hear a merri bawdi play , 
 a nois of target , or to see a fellow 
 in a long motley coat guard with yellow , 
 will be deceiv 'd ; for , gentl hearer , know , 
 to rank our chosen truth with such a show 
 as fool and fight is , besid forfeit 
 our own brain , and the opinion that we bring 
 to make that onli true we now intend , 
 will leav us never an understand friend . 
 therefor , for good sake , and as you are known 
 the first and happiest hearer of the town , 
 be sad , as we would make ye . think ye see 
 the veri person of our nobl stori 
 as they were live ; think you see them great , 
 and follow 'd with the gener throng and sweat 
 of thousand friend ; then , in a moment , see 
 how soon thi mighti meet miseri . 
 and if you can be merri then , i 'll say 
 a man may weep upon hi wedding-day . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the duke of norfolk at one door ; at the other , 
 the duke of buckingham and the lord abergavenni 
 
 buckingham . good morrow , and well met . how have ye done 
 sinc last we saw in franc ? 
 norfolk . i thank your grace , 
 health ; and ever sinc a fresh admir 
 of what i saw there . 
 buckingham . an untim agu 
 stay 'd me a prison in my chamber when 
 those sun of glori , those two light of men , 
 met in the vale of andren . 
 norfolk . 'twixt guyn and arde- 
 i wa then present , saw them salut on horseback ; 
 beheld them , when they light , how they clung 
 in their embrac , as they grew togeth ; 
 which had they , what four thron 'd one could have weigh 'd 
 such a compound one ? 
 buckingham . all the whole time 
 i wa my chamber 's prison . 
 norfolk . then you lost 
 the view of earthli glori ; men might say , 
 till thi time pomp wa singl , but now marri 
 to one abov itself . each follow day 
 becam the next day 's master , till the last 
 made former wonder it . to-day the french , 
 all clinquant , all in gold , like heathen god , 
 shone down the english ; and to-morrow they 
 made britain india : everi man that stood 
 show 'd like a mine . their dwarfish page were 
 as cherubin , an gilt ; the madam too , 
 not us 'd to toil , did almost sweat to bear 
 the pride upon them , that their veri labour 
 wa to them as a paint . now thi masqu 
 wa cri incompar ; and th ' ensu night 
 made it a fool and beggar . the two king , 
 equal in lustr , were now best , now worst , 
 as presenc did present them : him in eye 
 still him in prais ; and be present both , 
 't wa said they saw but one , and no discern 
 durst wag hi tongu in censur . when these suns- 
 for so they phrase 'em-bi their herald challeng 'd 
 the nobl spirit to arm , they did perform 
 beyond thought 's compass , that former fabul stori , 
 be now seen possibl enough , got credit , 
 that bevi wa believ 'd . 
 buckingham . o , you go far ! 
 norfolk . as i belong to worship , and affect 
 in honour honesti , the tract of ev'ryth 
 would by a good discours lose some life 
 which action 's self wa tongu to . all wa royal : 
 to the dispos of it nought rebel 'd ; 
 order gave each thing view . the offic did 
 distinctli hi full function . 
 buckingham . who did guide- 
 i mean , who set the bodi and the limb 
 of thi great sport togeth , as you guess ? 
 norfolk . one , cert , that promis no element 
 in such a busi . 
 buckingham . i pray you , who , my lord ? 
 norfolk . all thi wa ord'r by the good discret 
 of the right reverend cardin of york . 
 buckingham . the devil speed him ! no man 's pie is freed 
 from hi ambiti finger . what had he 
 to do in these fierc vaniti ? i wonder 
 that such a keech can with hi veri bulk 
 take up the ray o ' th ' benefici sun , 
 and keep it from the earth . 
 norfolk . sure , sir , 
 there 's in him stuff that put him to these end ; 
 for , be not propp 'd by ancestri , whose grace 
 chalk successor their way , nor call 'd upon 
 for high feat done to th ' crown , neither alli 
 to emin assist , but spider-lik , 
 out of hi self-draw web , ' a give us note 
 the forc of hi own merit make hi way- 
 a gift that heaven give for him , which buy 
 a place next to the king . 
 abergavenni . i can not tell 
 what heaven hath given him-let some graver eye 
 pierc into that ; but i can see hi pride 
 peep through each part of him . whenc ha he that ? 
 if not from hell , the devil is a niggard 
 or ha given all befor , and he begin 
 a new hell in himself . 
 buckingham . whi the devil , 
 upon thi french go out , took he upon him- 
 without the priviti o ' th ' king-t ' appoint 
 who should attend on him ? he make up the file 
 of all the gentri ; for the most part such 
 to whom as great a charg as littl honour 
 he meant to lay upon ; and hi own letter , 
 the honour board of council out , 
 must fetch him in he paper . 
 abergavenni . i do know 
 kinsmen of mine , three at the least , that have 
 by thi so sicken 'd their estat that never 
 they shall abound as formerli . 
 buckingham . o , mani 
 have broke their back with lay manor on 'em 
 for thi great journey . what did thi vaniti 
 but minist commun of 
 a most poor issu ? 
 norfolk . grievingli i think 
 the peac between the french and us not valu 
 the cost that did conclud it . 
 buckingham . everi man , 
 after the hideou storm that follow 'd , wa 
 a thing inspir 'd , and , not consult , broke 
 into a gener prophecy-that thi tempest , 
 dash the garment of thi peac , abod 
 the sudden breach o n't . 
 norfolk . which is bud out ; 
 for franc hath flaw 'd the leagu , and hath attach 'd 
 our merchant ' good at bordeaux . 
 abergavenni . is it therefor 
 th ' ambassador is silenc 'd ? 
 norfolk . marri , is't . 
 abergavenni . a proper tide of a peac , and purcha 'd 
 at a superflu rate ! 
 buckingham . whi , all thi busi 
 our reverend cardin carri . 
 norfolk . like it your grace , 
 the state take notic of the privat differ 
 betwixt you and the cardin . i advis you- 
 and take it from a heart that wish toward you 
 honour and plenteou safety-that you read 
 the cardin 's malic and hi potenc 
 togeth ; to consid further , that 
 what hi high hatr would effect want not 
 a minist in hi power . you know hi natur , 
 that he 's reveng ; and i know hi sword 
 hath a sharp edge-it 's long and't may be said 
 it reach far , and where 'twill not extend , 
 thither he dart it . bosom up my counsel 
 you 'll find it wholesom . lo , where come that rock 
 that i advis your shun . 
 
 enter cardin wolsey , the purs born befor 
 him , certain of the guard , and two secretari 
 with paper . the cardin in hi passag fixeth hi 
 eye on buckingham , and buckingham on him , 
 both full of disdain 
 
 wolsey . the duke of buckingham 's surveyor ? ha ! 
 where 's hi examin ? 
 secretari . here , so pleas you . 
 wolsey . is he in person readi ? 
 secretari . ay , pleas your grace . 
 wolsey . well , we shall then know more , and buckingham 
 shall lessen thi big look . 
 exeunt wolsey and hi train 
 buckingham . thi butcher 's cur is venom-mouth 'd , and i 
 have not the power to muzzl him ; therefor best 
 not wake him in hi slumber . a beggar 's book 
 outworth a nobl 's blood . 
 norfolk . what , are you chaf 'd ? 
 ask god for temp'ranc ; that 's th ' applianc onli 
 which your diseas requir . 
 buckingham . i read in 's look 
 matter against me , and hi eye revil 'd 
 me as hi abject object . at thi instant 
 he bore me with some trick . he 's gone to th ' king ; 
 i 'll follow , and outstar him . 
 norfolk . stay , my lord , 
 and let your reason with your choler question 
 what 't is you go about . to climb steep hill 
 requir slow pace at first . anger is like 
 a full hot hors , who be allow 'd hi way , 
 self-mettl tire him . not a man in england 
 can advis me like you ; be to yourself 
 as you would to your friend . 
 buckingham . i 'll to the king , 
 and from a mouth of honour quit cri down 
 thi ipswich fellow 's insol ; or proclaim 
 there 's differ in no person . 
 norfolk . be advi 'd : 
 heat not a furnac for your foe so hot 
 that it do sing yourself . we may outrun 
 by violent swift that which we run at , 
 and lose by over-run . know you not 
 the fire that mount the liquor till't run o'er 
 in seem to augment it wast it ? be advi 'd . 
 i say again there is no english soul 
 more stronger to direct you than yourself , 
 if with the sap of reason you would quench 
 or but allay the fire of passion . 
 buckingham . sir , 
 i am thank to you , and i 'll go along 
 by your prescript ; but thi top-proud fellow- 
 whom from the flow of gan i name not , but 
 from sincer motion , by intellig , 
 and proof as clear as fount in juli when 
 we see each grain of gravel-i do know 
 to be corrupt and treason . 
 norfolk . say not treason . 
 buckingham . to th ' king i 'll say't , and make my vouch as strong 
 as shore of rock . attend : thi holi fox , 
 or wolf , or both-for he is equal rav'nou 
 as he is subtl , and as prone to mischief 
 as abl to perform't , hi mind and place 
 infect one anoth , yea , reciprocally- 
 onli to show hi pomp as well in franc 
 as here at home , suggest the king our master 
 to thi last costli treati , th ' interview 
 that swallow so much treasur and like a glass 
 did break i ' th ' wrench . 
 norfolk . faith , and so it did . 
 buckingham . pray , give me favour , sir ; thi cun cardin 
 the articl o ' th ' combin drew 
 as himself plea 'd ; and they were ratifi 
 as he cri 'thu let be ' to as much end 
 as give a crutch to th ' dead . but our count-cardin 
 ha done thi , and 't is well ; for worthi wolsey , 
 who can not err , he did it . now thi follow , 
 which , as i take it , is a kind of puppi 
 to th ' old dam treason : charl the emperor , 
 under pretenc to see the queen hi aunt- 
 for 't wa inde hi colour , but he came 
 to whisper wolsey-her make visitation- 
 hi fear were that the interview betwixt 
 england and franc might through their amiti 
 breed him some prejudic ; for from thi leagu 
 peep 'd harm that menac 'd him-privili 
 deal with our cardin ; and , as i trow- 
 which i do well , for i am sure the emperor 
 paid ere he promi 'd ; wherebi hi suit wa grant 
 ere it wa ask'd-but when the way wa made , 
 and pav 'd with gold , the emperor thu desir 'd , 
 that he would pleas to alter the king 's cours , 
 and break the foresaid peac . let the king know , 
 as soon he shall by me , that thu the cardin 
 doe buy and sell hi honour as he pleas , 
 and for hi own advantag . 
 norfolk . i am sorri 
 to hear thi of him , and could wish he were 
 someth mistaken i n't . 
 buckingham . no , not a syllabl : 
 i do pronounc him in that veri shape 
 he shall appear in proof . 
 
 enter brandon , a sergeant-at-arm befor him , 
 and two or three of the guard 
 
 brandon . your offic , sergeant : execut it . 
 sergeant . sir , 
 my lord the duke of buckingham , and earl 
 of hereford , stafford , and northampton , i 
 arrest thee of high treason , in the name 
 of our most sovereign king . 
 buckingham . lo you , my lord , 
 the net ha fall'n upon me ! i shall perish 
 under devic and practic . 
 brandon . i am sorri 
 to see you ta'en from liberti , to look on 
 the busi present ; 't is hi high ' pleasur 
 you shall to th ' tower . 
 buckingham . it will help noth 
 to plead mine innoc ; for that dye is on me 
 which make my whit'st part black . the will of heav'n 
 be done in thi and all thing ! i obey . 
 o my lord aberga'ni , fare you well ! 
 brandon . nay , he must bear you compani . 
 [ to abergavenni ] the king 
 is plea 'd you shall to th ' tower , till you know 
 how he determin further . 
 abergavenni . as the duke said , 
 the will of heaven be done , and the king 's pleasur 
 by me obey 'd . 
 brandon . here is warrant from 
 the king t ' attach lord montacut and the bodi 
 of the duke 's confessor , john de la car , 
 one gilbert peck , hi chancellor- 
 buckingham . so , so ! 
 these are the limb o ' th ' plot ; no more , i hope . 
 brandon . a monk o ' th ' chartreux . 
 buckingham . o , nichola hopkin ? 
 brandon . he . 
 buckingham . my surveyor is fals . the o'er-great cardin 
 hath show 'd him gold ; my life is spann 'd alreadi . 
 i am the shadow of poor buckingham , 
 whose figur even thi instant cloud put on 
 by dark'n my clear sun . my lord , farewel . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 london . the council chamber 
 
 cornet . enter king henri , lean on the cardin 's shoulder , the nobl , 
 and sir thoma lovel , with other . the cardin place himself 
 under the king 's feet on hi right side 
 
 king . my life itself , and the best heart of it , 
 thank you for thi great care ; i stood i ' th ' level 
 of a full-charg 'd confederaci , and give thank 
 to you that chok 'd it . let be call 'd befor us 
 that gentleman of buckingham 's . in person 
 i 'll hear hi confess justifi ; 
 and point by point the treason of hi master 
 he shall again relat . 
 
 a nois within , cri 'room for the queen ! ' 
 enter the queen , usher 'd by the duke of norfolk 
 and suffolk ; she kneel . the king riseth 
 from hi state , take her up , kiss and placeth her 
 by him 
 
 queen katharin . nay , we must longer kneel : i am suitor . 
 king . aris , and take place by us . half your suit 
 never name to us : you have half our power . 
 the other moieti ere you ask is given ; 
 repeat your will , and take it . 
 queen katharin . thank your majesti . 
 that you would love yourself , and in that love 
 not unconsid leav your honour nor 
 the digniti of your offic , is the point 
 of my petit . 
 king . ladi mine , proceed . 
 queen katharin . i am solicit , not by a few , 
 and those of true condit , that your subject 
 are in great grievanc : there have been commiss 
 sent down among 'em which hath flaw 'd the heart 
 of all their loyalti ; wherein , although , 
 my good lord cardin , they vent reproach 
 most bitterli on you as putter-on 
 of these exact , yet the king our master- 
 whose honour heaven shield from soil ! -even he escap not 
 languag unmannerli ; yea , such which break 
 the side of loyalti , and almost appear 
 in loud rebellion . 
 norfolk . not almost appears- 
 it doth appear ; for , upon these taxat , 
 the clothier all , not abl to maintain 
 the mani to them 'long , have put of 
 the spinster , carder , fuller , weaver , who 
 unfit for other life , compel 'd by hunger 
 and lack of other mean , in desper manner 
 dare th ' event to th ' teeth , are all in uproar , 
 and danger serv among them . 
 king . taxat ! 
 wherein ? and what taxat ? my lord cardin , 
 you that are blam 'd for it alik with us , 
 know you of thi taxat ? 
 wolsey . pleas you , sir , 
 i know but of a singl part in aught 
 pertain to th ' state , and front but in that file 
 where other tell step with me . 
 queen katharin . no , my lord ! 
 you know no more than other ! but you frame 
 thing that are known alik , which are not wholesom 
 to those which would not know them , and yet must 
 perforc be their acquaint . these exact , 
 whereof my sovereign would have note , they are 
 most pestil to th ' hear ; and to bear 'em 
 the back is sacrific to th ' load . they say 
 they are devi 'd by you , or els you suffer 
 too hard an exclam . 
 king . still exact ! 
 the natur of it ? in what kind , let 's know , 
 is thi exact ? 
 queen katharin . i am much too ventur 
 in tempt of your patienc , but am bold'n 
 under your promi 'd pardon . the subject ' grief 
 come through commiss , which compel from each 
 the sixth part of hi substanc , to be levi 
 without delay ; and the pretenc for thi 
 is nam 'd your war in franc . thi make bold mouth ; 
 tongu spit their duti out , and cold heart freez 
 allegi in them ; their curs now 
 live where their prayer did ; and it 's come to pass 
 thi tractabl obedi is a slave 
 to each incens will . i would your high 
 would give it quick consider , for 
 there is no primer busi . 
 king . by my life , 
 thi is against our pleasur . 
 wolsey . and for me , 
 i have no further gone in thi than by 
 a singl voic ; and that not pass 'd me but 
 by learn approb of the judg . if i am 
 traduc 'd by ignor tongu , which neither know 
 my faculti nor person , yet will be 
 the chronicl of my do , let me say 
 't is but the fate of place , and the rough brake 
 that virtu must go through . we must not stint 
 our necessari action in the fear 
 to cope malici censur , which ever 
 as rav'nou fish do a vessel follow 
 that is new-trimm 'd , but benefit no further 
 than vainli long . what we oft do best , 
 by sick interpret , onc weak one , is 
 not our , or not allow 'd ; what worst , as oft 
 hit a grosser qualiti , is cri up 
 for our best act . if we shall stand still , 
 in fear our motion will be mock 'd or carp 'd at , 
 we should take root here where we sit , or sit 
 state-statu onli . 
 king . thing done well 
 and with a care exempt themselv from fear : 
 thing done without exampl , in their issu 
 are to be fear 'd . have you a preced 
 of thi commiss ? i believ , not ani . 
 we must not rend our subject from our law , 
 and stick them in our will . sixth part of each ? 
 a trembl contribut ! whi , we take 
 from everi tree lop , bark , and part o ' th ' timber ; 
 and though we leav it with a root , thu hack 'd , 
 the air will drink the sap . to everi counti 
 where thi is question 'd send our letter with 
 free pardon to each man that ha deni 
 the forc of thi commiss . pray , look tot ; 
 i put it to your care . 
 wolsey . [ asid to the secretari ] a word with you . 
 let there be letter writ to everi shire 
 of the king 's grace and pardon . the griev common 
 hardli conceiv of me-let it be noi 'd 
 that through our intercess thi revok 
 and pardon come . i shall anon advis you 
 further in the proceed . exit secretari 
 
 enter surveyor 
 
 queen katharin . i am sorri that the duke of buckingham 
 is run in your displeasur . 
 king . it griev mani . 
 the gentleman is learn 'd and a most rare speaker ; 
 to natur none more bound ; hi train such 
 that he may furnish and instruct great teacher 
 and never seek for aid out of himself . yet see , 
 when these so nobl benefit shall prove 
 not well dispo 'd , the mind grow onc corrupt , 
 they turn to viciou form , ten time more ugli 
 than ever they were fair . thi man so complet , 
 who wa enrol 'd 'mongst wonder , and when we , 
 almost with ravish 'd list'n , could not find 
 hi hour of speech a minute-h , my ladi , 
 hath into monstrou habit put the grace 
 that onc were hi , and is becom as black 
 as if besmear 'd in hell . sit by us ; you shall hear- 
 thi wa hi gentleman in trust-of him 
 thing to strike honour sad . bid him recount 
 the fore-recit practic , whereof 
 we can not feel too littl , hear too much . 
 wolsey . stand forth , and with bold spirit relat what you , 
 most like a care subject , have collect 
 out of the duke of buckingham . 
 king . speak freeli . 
 surveyor . first , it wa usual with him-everi day 
 it would infect hi speech-that if the king 
 should without issu die , he 'll carri it so 
 to make the sceptr hi . these veri word 
 i 've heard him utter to hi son-in-law , 
 lord aberga'ni , to whom by oath he menac 'd 
 reveng upon the cardin . 
 wolsey . pleas your high , note 
 thi danger concept in thi point : 
 not friend by hi wish , to your high person 
 hi will is most malign , and it stretch 
 beyond you to your friend . 
 queen katharin . my learn 'd lord cardin , 
 deliv all with chariti . 
 king . speak on . 
 how ground he hi titl to the crown 
 upon our fail ? to thi point hast thou heard him 
 at ani time speak aught ? 
 surveyor . he wa brought to thi 
 by a vain propheci of nichola henton . 
 king . what wa that henton ? 
 surveyor . sir , a chartreux friar , 
 hi confessor , who fed him everi minut 
 with word of sovereignti . 
 king . how know'st thou thi ? 
 surveyor . not long befor your high sped to franc , 
 the duke be at the rose , within the parish 
 saint lawrenc poultney , did of me demand 
 what wa the speech among the london 
 concern the french journey . i repli 
 men fear 'd the french would prove perfidi , 
 to the king 's danger . present the duke 
 said 't wa the fear inde and that he doubt 
 'twould prove the veriti of certain word 
 spoke by a holi monk 'that oft ' say he 
 'hath sent to me , wish me to permit 
 john de la car , my chaplain , a choic hour 
 to hear from him a matter of some moment ; 
 whom after under the confess 's seal 
 he solemnli had sworn that what he spoke 
 my chaplain to no creatur live but 
 to me should utter , with demur confid 
 thi pausingli ensu 'd : `` neither the king nor 's heir , 
 tell you the duke , shall prosper ; bid him strive 
 to gain the love o ' th ' commonalti ; the duke 
 shall govern england . '' ' 
 queen katharin . if i know you well , 
 you were the duke 's surveyor , and lost your offic 
 on the complaint o ' th ' tenant . take good heed 
 you charg not in your spleen a nobl person 
 and spoil your nobler soul . i say , take heed ; 
 ye , heartili beseech you . 
 king . let him on . 
 go forward . 
 surveyor . on my soul , i 'll speak but truth . 
 i told my lord the duke , by th ' devil 's illus 
 the monk might be deceiv 'd , and that 't wa danger 
 for him 
 to rumin on thi so far , until 
 it forg 'd him some design , which , be believ 'd , 
 it wa much like to do . he answer 'd 'tush , 
 it can do me no damag ' ; ad further 
 that , had the king in hi last sick fail 'd , 
 the cardin 's and sir thoma lovel 's head 
 should have gone off . 
 king . ha ! what , so rank ? ah ha ! 
 there 's mischief in thi man . canst thou say further ? 
 surveyor . i can , my lieg . 
 king . proceed . 
 surveyor . be at greenwich , 
 after your high had reprov 'd the duke 
 about sir william bulmer- 
 king . i rememb 
 of such a time : be my sworn servant , 
 the duke retain 'd him hi . but on : what henc ? 
 surveyor . 'if ' quoth he ' i for thi had been committed- 
 as to the tower i thought-i would have play 'd 
 the part my father meant to act upon 
 th ' usurp richard ; who , be at salisburi , 
 made suit to come in 's presenc , which if grant , 
 as he made semblanc of hi duti , would 
 have put hi knife into him . ' 
 king . a giant traitor ! 
 wolsey . now , madam , may hi high live in freedom , 
 and thi man out of prison ? 
 queen katharin . god mend all ! 
 king . there 's someth more would out of thee : what say'st ? 
 surveyor . after 'the duke hi father ' with the 'knife , ' 
 he stretch 'd him , and , with one hand on hi dagger , 
 anoth spread on 's breast , mount hi eye , 
 he did discharg a horribl oath , whose tenour 
 wa , were he evil us 'd , he would outgo 
 hi father by as much as a perform 
 doe an irresolut purpos . 
 king . there 's hi period , 
 to sheath hi knife in us . he is attach 'd ; 
 call him to present trial . if he may 
 find merci in the law , 't is hi ; if none , 
 let him not seek't of us . by day and night ! 
 he 's traitor to th ' height . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the lord chamberlain and lord sandi 
 
 chamberlain . is't possibl the spell of franc should juggl 
 men into such strang mysteri ? 
 sandi . new custom , 
 though they be never so ridicul , 
 nay , let 'em be unmanli , yet are follow 'd . 
 chamberlain . as far as i see , all the good our english 
 have got by the late voyag is but mere 
 a fit or two o ' th ' face ; but they are shrewd one ; 
 for when they hold 'em , you would swear directli 
 their veri nose had been counsellor 
 to pepin or clothariu , they keep state so . 
 sandi . they have all new leg , and lame one . one would take it , 
 that never saw 'em pace befor , the spavin 
 or springhalt reign 'd among 'em . 
 chamberlain . death ! my lord , 
 their cloth are after such a pagan cut to't , 
 that sure th ' have worn out christendom . 
 
 enter sir thoma lovel 
 
 how now ? 
 what news , sir thoma lovel ? 
 lovel . faith , my lord , 
 i hear of none but the new proclam 
 that 's clapp 'd upon the court gate . 
 chamberlain . what is't for ? 
 lovel . the reform of our travel 'd gallant , 
 that fill the court with quarrel , talk , and tailor . 
 chamberlain . i am glad 't is there . now i would pray our monsieur 
 to think an english courtier may be wise , 
 and never see the louvr . 
 lovel . they must either , 
 for so run the condit , leav those remnant 
 of fool and feather that they got in franc , 
 with all their honour point of ignor 
 pertain thereunto-a fight and firework ; 
 abus better men than they can be , 
 out of a foreign wisdom-renounc clean 
 the faith they have in tenni , and tall stock , 
 short blist'r breech , and those type of travel 
 and understand again like honest men , 
 or pack to their old playfellow . there , i take it , 
 they may , cum privilegio , wear away 
 the lag end of their lewd and be laugh 'd at . 
 sandi . 't is time to give 'em physic , their diseas 
 are grown so catch . 
 chamberlain . what a loss our ladi 
 will have of these trim vaniti ! 
 lovel . ay , marri , 
 there will be woe inde , lord : the sli whoreson 
 have got a speed trick to lay down ladi . 
 a french song and a fiddl ha no fellow . 
 sandi . the devil fiddl 'em ! i am glad they are go , 
 for sure there 's no convert 'em . now 
 an honest countri lord , as i am , beaten 
 a long time out of play , may bring hi plainsong 
 and have an hour of hear ; and , by ' r ladi , 
 held current music too . 
 chamberlain . well said , lord sandi ; 
 your colt 's tooth is not cast yet . 
 sandi . no , my lord , 
 nor shall not while i have a stamp . 
 chamberlain . sir thoma , 
 whither were you a-go ? 
 lovel . to the cardin 's ; 
 your lordship is a guest too . 
 chamberlain . o , 't is true ; 
 thi night he make a supper , and a great one , 
 to mani lord and ladi ; there will be 
 the beauti of thi kingdom , i 'll assur you . 
 lovel . that churchman bear a bounteou mind inde , 
 a hand as fruit as the land that feed us ; 
 hi dew fall everywher . 
 chamberlain . no doubt he 's nobl ; 
 he had a black mouth that said other of him . 
 sandi . he may , my lord ; ha wherewith . in him 
 spare would show a wors sin than ill doctrin : 
 men of hi way should be most liber , 
 they are set here for exampl . 
 chamberlain . true , they are so ; 
 but few now give so great one . my barg stay ; 
 your lordship shall along . come , good sir thoma , 
 we shall be late els ; which i would not be , 
 for i wa spoke to , with sir henri guildford , 
 thi night to be comptrol . 
 sandi . i am your lordship 's . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 london . the presenc chamber in york place 
 
 hautboy . a small tabl under a state for the cardin , 
 a longer tabl for the guest . then enter ann bullen , 
 and diver other ladi and gentlemen , as guest , at one door ; 
 at anoth door enter sir henri guildford 
 
 guildford . ladi , a gener welcom from hi grace 
 salut ye all ; thi night he dedic 
 to fair content and you . none here , he hope , 
 in all thi nobl bevi , ha brought with her 
 one care abroad ; he would have all as merri 
 as , first , good compani , good wine , good welcom , 
 can make good peopl . 
 
 enter lord chamberlain , lord sandi , and sir 
 thoma lovel 
 
 o , my lord , y'are tardi , 
 the veri thought of thi fair compani 
 clapp 'd wing to me . 
 chamberlain . you are young , sir harri guildford . 
 sandi . sir thoma lovel , had the cardin 
 but half my lay thought in him , some of these 
 should find a run banquet ere they rest 
 i think would better pleas 'em . by my life , 
 they are a sweet societi of fair one . 
 lovel . o that your lordship were but now confessor 
 to one or two of these ! 
 sandi . i would i were ; 
 they should find easi penanc . 
 lovel . faith , how easi ? 
 sandi . as easi as a down bed would afford it . 
 chamberlain . sweet ladi , will it pleas you sit ? sir harri , 
 place you that side ; i 'll take the charg of thi . 
 hi grace is ent'r . nay , you must not freez : 
 two women plac 'd togeth make cold weather . 
 my lord sandi , you are one will keep 'em wake : 
 pray sit between these ladi . 
 sandi . by my faith , 
 and thank your lordship . by your leav , sweet ladi . 
 [ seat himself between ann bullen and anoth ladi ] 
 if i chanc to talk a littl wild , forgiv me ; 
 i had it from my father . 
 ann . wa he mad , sir ? 
 sandi . o , veri mad , exceed mad , in love too . 
 but he would bite none ; just as i do now , 
 he would kiss you twenti with a breath . [ kiss her ] 
 chamberlain . well said , my lord . 
 so , now y'are fairli seat . gentlemen , 
 the penanc lie on you if these fair ladi 
 pass away frown . 
 sandi . for my littl cure , 
 let me alon . 
 
 hautboy . enter cardin wolsey , attend ; and 
 take hi state 
 
 wolsey . y'are welcom , my fair guest . that nobl ladi 
 or gentleman that is not freeli merri 
 is not my friend . thi , to confirm my welcome- 
 and to you all , good health ! [ drink ] 
 sandi . your grace is nobl . 
 let me have such a bowl may hold my thank 
 and save me so much talk . 
 wolsey . my lord sandi , 
 i am behold to you . cheer your neighbour . 
 ladi , you are not merri . gentlemen , 
 whose fault is thi ? 
 sandi . the red wine first must rise 
 in their fair cheek , my lord ; then we shall have 'em 
 talk us to silenc . 
 ann . you are a merri gamest , 
 my lord sandi . 
 sandi . ye , if i make my play . 
 here 's to your ladyship ; and pledg it , madam , 
 for 't is to such a thing- 
 ann . you can not show me . 
 sandi . i told your grace they would talk anon . 
 [ drum and trumpet . chamber discharg 'd ] 
 wolsey . what 's that ? 
 chamberlain . look out there , some of ye . exit a servant 
 wolsey . what warlik voic , 
 and to what end , is thi ? nay , ladi , fear not : 
 by all the law of war y'are privileg 'd . 
 
 re-ent servant 
 
 chamberlain . how now ! what is't ? 
 servant . a nobl troop of strangers- 
 for so they seem . th ' have left their barg and land , 
 and hither make , as great ambassador 
 from foreign princ . 
 wolsey . good lord chamberlain , 
 go , give 'em welcom ; you can speak the french tongu ; 
 and pray receiv 'em nobli and conduct 'em 
 into our presenc , where thi heaven of beauti 
 shall shine at full upon them . some attend him . 
 exit chamberlain attend . all rise , and tabl remov 'd 
 you have now a broken banquet , but we 'll mend it . 
 a good digest to you all ; and onc more 
 i show ' r a welcom on ye ; welcom all . 
 
 hautboy . enter the king , and other , as masker , 
 habit like shepherd , usher 'd by the lord chamberlain . 
 they pass directli befor the cardin , 
 and grace salut him 
 
 a nobl compani ! what are their pleasur ? 
 chamberlain . becaus they speak no english , thu they pray 'd 
 to tell your grace , that , have heard by fame 
 of thi so nobl and so fair assembl 
 thi night to meet here , they could do no less , 
 out of the great respect they bear to beauti , 
 but leav their flock and , under your fair conduct , 
 crave leav to view these ladi and entreat 
 an hour of revel with 'em . 
 wolsey . say , lord chamberlain , 
 they have done my poor hous grace ; for which i pay 'em 
 a thousand thank , and pray 'em take their pleasur . 
 [ they choos ladi . the king choos ann bullen ] 
 king . the fairest hand i ever touch 'd ! o beauti , 
 till now i never knew thee ! [ music . danc ] 
 wolsey . my lord ! 
 chamberlain . your grace ? 
 wolsey . pray tell 'em thu much from me : 
 there should be one amongst 'em , by hi person , 
 more worthi thi place than myself ; to whom , 
 if i but knew him , with my love and duti 
 i would surrend it . 
 chamberlain . i will , my lord . 
 [ he whisper to the masker ] 
 wolsey . what say they ? 
 chamberlain . such a one , they all confess , 
 there is inde ; which they would have your grace 
 find out , and he will take it . 
 wolsey . let me see , then . [ come from hi state ] 
 by all your good leav , gentlemen , here i 'll make 
 my royal choic . 
 king . [ unmask ] ye have found him , cardin . 
 you hold a fair assembl ; you do well , lord . 
 you are a churchman , or , i 'll tell you , cardin , 
 i should judg now unhappili . 
 wolsey . i am glad 
 your grace is grown so pleasant . 
 king . my lord chamberlain , 
 prithe come hither : what fair ladi 's that ? 
 chamberlain . a n't pleas your grace , sir thoma bullen 's 
 daughter- 
 the viscount rochford-on of her high ' women . 
 king . by heaven , she is a dainti one . sweet heart , 
 i were unmannerli to take you out 
 and not to kiss you . a health , gentlemen ! 
 let it go round . 
 wolsey . sir thoma lovel , is the banquet readi 
 i ' th ' privi chamber ? 
 lovel . ye , my lord . 
 wolsey . your grace , 
 i fear , with danc is a littl heat . 
 king . i fear , too much . 
 wolsey . there 's fresher air , my lord , 
 in the next chamber . 
 king . lead in your ladi , ev'ri one . sweet partner , 
 i must not yet forsak you . let 's be merri : 
 good my lord cardin , i have half a dozen health 
 to drink to these fair ladi , and a measur 
 to lead 'em onc again ; and then let 's dream 
 who 's best in favour . let the music knock it . 
 exeunt , with trumpet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 westminst . a street 
 
 enter two gentlemen , at sever door 
 
 first gentleman . whither away so fast ? 
 second gentleman . o , god save ye ! 
 ev'n to the hall , to hear what shall becom 
 of the great duke of buckingham . 
 first gentleman . i 'll save you 
 that labour , sir . all 's now done but the ceremoni 
 of bring back the prison . 
 second gentleman . were you there ? 
 first gentleman . ye , inde , wa i . 
 second gentleman . pray , speak what ha happen 'd . 
 first gentleman . you may guess quickli what . 
 second gentleman . is he found guilti ? 
 first gentleman . ye , truli is he , and condemn 'd upo n't . 
 second gentleman . i am sorri for't . 
 first gentleman . so are a number more . 
 second gentleman . but , pray , how pass 'd it ? 
 first gentleman . i 'll tell you in a littl . the great duke . 
 came to the bar ; where to hi accus 
 he plead still not guilti , and alleg 
 mani sharp reason to defeat the law . 
 the king 's attorney , on the contrari , 
 urg 'd on the examin , proof , confess , 
 of diver wit ; which the duke desir 'd 
 to have brought , viva voce , to hi face ; 
 at which appear 'd against him hi surveyor , 
 sir gilbert peck hi chancellor , and john car , 
 confessor to him , with that devil-monk , 
 hopkin , that made thi mischief . 
 second gentleman . that wa he 
 that fed him with hi propheci ? 
 first gentleman . the same . 
 all these accu 'd him strongli , which he fain 
 would have flung from him ; but inde he could not ; 
 and so hi peer , upon thi evid , 
 have found him guilti of high treason . much 
 he spoke , and learnedli , for life ; but all 
 wa either piti in him or forgotten . 
 second gentleman . after all thi , how did he bear him-self 
 first gentleman . when he wa brought again to th ' bar to hear 
 hi knell rung out , hi judgment , he wa stirr 'd 
 with such an agoni he sweat extrem , 
 and someth spoke in choler , ill and hasti ; 
 but he fell to himself again , and sweetli 
 in all the rest show 'd a most nobl patienc . 
 second gentleman . i do not think he fear death . 
 first gentleman . sure , he doe not ; 
 he never wa so womanish ; the caus 
 he may a littl griev at . 
 second gentleman . certainli 
 the cardin is the end of thi . 
 first gentleman . 't is like , 
 by all conjectur : first , kildar 's attaind , 
 then deputi of ireland , who remov 'd , 
 earl surrey wa sent thither , and in hast too , 
 lest he should help hi father . 
 second gentleman . that trick of state 
 wa a deep enviou one . 
 first gentleman . at hi return 
 no doubt he will requit it . thi is note , 
 and gener : whoever the king favour 
 the cardin instantli will find employ , 
 and far enough from court too . 
 second gentleman . all the common 
 hate him pernici , and , o ' my conscienc , 
 wish him ten fathom deep : thi duke as much 
 they love and dote on ; call him bounteou buckingham , 
 the mirror of all courtesy- 
 
 enter buckingham from hi arraign , tip-stav 
 befor him ; the axe with the edg toward him ; halberd 
 on each side ; accompani with sir thoma 
 lovel , sir nichola vaux , sir william sandi , 
 and common peopl , etc . 
 
 first gentleman . stay there , sir , 
 and see the nobl ruin 'd man you speak of . 
 second gentleman . let 's stand close , and behold him . 
 buckingham . all good peopl , 
 you that thu far have come to piti me , 
 hear what i say , and then go home and lose me . 
 i have thi day receiv 'd a traitor 's judgment , 
 and by that name must die ; yet , heaven bear wit , 
 and if i have a conscienc , let it sink me 
 even as the axe fall , if i be not faith ! 
 the law i bear no malic for my death : 
 't ha done , upon the premis , but justic . 
 but those that sought it i could wish more christian . 
 be what they will , i heartili forgiv 'em ; 
 yet let 'em look they glori not in mischief 
 nor build their evil on the grave of great men , 
 for then my guiltless blood must cri against 'em . 
 for further life in thi world i ne'er hope 
 nor will i sue , although the king have merci 
 more than i dare make fault . you few that lov 'd me 
 and dare be bold to weep for buckingham , 
 hi nobl friend and fellow , whom to leav 
 is onli bitter to him , onli die , 
 go with me like good angel to my end ; 
 and as the long divorc of steel fall on me 
 make of your prayer one sweet sacrific , 
 and lift my soul to heaven . lead on , a god 's name . 
 lovel . i do beseech your grace , for chariti , 
 if ever ani malic in your heart 
 were hid against me , now to forgiv me frankli . 
 buckingham . sir thoma lovel , i as free forgiv you 
 as i would be forgiven . i forgiv all . 
 there can not be those numberless offenc 
 'gainst me that i can not take peac with . no black envi 
 shall mark my grave . commend me to hi grace ; 
 and if he speak of buckingham , pray tell him 
 you met him half in heaven . my vow and prayer 
 yet are the king 's , and , till my soul forsak , 
 shall cri for bless on him . may he live 
 longer than i have time to tell hi year ; 
 ever belov 'd and love may hi rule be ; 
 and when old time shall lead him to hi end , 
 good and he fill up one monument ! 
 lovel . to th ' water side i must conduct your grace ; 
 then give my charg up to sir nichola vaux , 
 who undertak you to your end . 
 vaux . prepar there ; 
 the duke is come ; see the barg be readi ; 
 and fit it with such furnitur as suit 
 the great of hi person . 
 buckingham . nay , sir nichola , 
 let it alon ; my state now will but mock me . 
 when i came hither i wa lord high constabl 
 and duke of buckingham ; now , poor edward bohun . 
 yet i am richer than my base accus 
 that never knew what truth meant ; i now seal it ; 
 and with that blood will make 'em one day groan fort . 
 my nobl father , henri of buckingham , 
 who first rai 'd head against usurp richard , 
 fli for succour to hi servant banist , 
 be distress 'd , wa by that wretch betray 'd 
 and without trial fell ; god 's peac be with him ! 
 henri the seventh succeed , truli piti 
 my father 's loss , like a most royal princ , 
 restor 'd me to my honour , and out of ruin 
 made my name onc more nobl . now hi son , 
 henri the eighth , life , honour , name , and all 
 that made me happi , at one stroke ha taken 
 for ever from the world . i had my trial , 
 and must need say a nobl one ; which make me 
 a littl happier than my wretch father ; 
 yet thu far we are one in fortun : both 
 fell by our servant , by those men we lov 'd most- 
 a most unnatur and faithless servic . 
 heaven ha an end in all . yet , you that hear me , 
 thi from a die man receiv as certain : 
 where you are liber of your love and counsel , 
 be sure you be not loos ; for those you make friend 
 and give your heart to , when they onc perceiv 
 the least rub in your fortun , fall away 
 like water from ye , never found again 
 but where they mean to sink ye . all good peopl , 
 pray for me ! i must now forsak ye ; the last hour 
 of my long weari life is come upon me . 
 farewel ; 
 and when you would say someth that is sad , 
 speak how i fell . i have done ; and god forgiv me ! 
 exeunt buckingham and train 
 first gentleman . o , thi is full of piti ! sir , it call , 
 i fear , too mani curs on their head 
 that were the author . 
 second gentleman . if the duke be guiltless , 
 't is full of woe ; yet i can give you inkl 
 of an ensu evil , if it fall , 
 greater than thi . 
 first gentleman . good angel keep it from us ! 
 what may it be ? you do not doubt my faith , sir ? 
 second gentleman . thi secret is so weighti , 'twill requir 
 a strong faith to conceal it . 
 first gentleman . let me have it ; 
 i do not talk much . 
 second gentleman . i am confid . 
 you shall , sir . did you not of late day hear 
 a buzz of a separ 
 between the king and katharin ? 
 first gentleman . ye , but it held not ; 
 for when the king onc heard it , out of anger 
 he sent command to the lord mayor straight 
 to stop the rumour and allay those tongu 
 that durst dispers it . 
 second gentleman . but that slander , sir , 
 is found a truth now ; for it grow again 
 fresher than e'er it wa , and held for certain 
 the king will ventur at it . either the cardin 
 or some about him near have , out of malic 
 to the good queen , possess 'd him with a scrupl 
 that will undo her . to confirm thi too , 
 cardin campeiu is arriv 'd and late ; 
 as all think , for thi busi . 
 first gentleman . 't is the cardin ; 
 and mere to reveng him on the emperor 
 for not bestow on him at hi ask 
 the archbishopr of toledo , thi is purpo 'd . 
 second gentleman . i think you have hit the mark ; but is't 
 not cruel 
 that she should feel the smart of thi ? the cardin 
 will have hi will , and she must fall . 
 first gentleman . 't is woeful . 
 we are too open here to argu thi ; 
 let 's think in privat more . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the lord chamberlain read thi letter 
 
 chamberlain . 'mi lord , 
 'the hors your lordship sent for , with all the care 
 had , i saw well chosen , ridden , and furnish 'd . they were 
 young and handsom , and of the best breed in the north . 
 when they were readi to set out for london , a man of 
 my lord cardin 's , by commiss , and main power , took 
 'em from me , with thi reason : hi master would be serv 'd 
 befor a subject , if not befor the king ; which stopp 'd 
 our mouth , sir . ' 
 
 i fear he will inde . well , let him have them . 
 he will have all , i think . 
 
 enter to the lord chamberlain the duke of norfolk and suffolk 
 
 norfolk . well met , my lord chamberlain . 
 chamberlain . good day to both your grace . 
 suffolk . how is the king employ 'd ? 
 chamberlain . i left him privat , 
 full of sad thought and troubl . 
 norfolk . what 's the caus ? 
 chamberlain . it seem the marriag with hi brother 's wife 
 ha crept too near hi conscienc . 
 suffolk . no , hi conscienc 
 ha crept too near anoth ladi . 
 norfolk . 't is so ; 
 thi is the cardin 's do ; the king-cardin , 
 that blind priest , like the eldest son of fortun , 
 turn what he list . the king will know him one day . 
 suffolk . pray god he do ! he 'll never know himself els . 
 norfolk . how holili he work in all hi busi ! 
 and with what zeal ! for , now he ha crack 'd the leagu 
 between us and the emperor , the queen 's great nephew , 
 he dive into the king 's soul and there scatter 
 danger , doubt , wring of the conscienc , 
 fear , and despairs-and all these for hi marriag ; 
 and out of all these to restor the king , 
 he counsel a divorc , a loss of her 
 that like a jewel ha hung twenti year 
 about hi neck , yet never lost her lustr ; 
 of her that love him with that excel 
 that angel love good men with ; even of her 
 that , when the greatest stroke of fortun fall , 
 will bless the king-and is not thi cours piou ? 
 chamberlain . heaven keep me from such counsel ! 't is most true 
 these news are everywher ; everi tongu speak 'em , 
 and everi true heart weep for 't . all that dare 
 look into these affair see thi main end- 
 the french king 's sister . heaven will one day open 
 the king 's eye , that so long have slept upon 
 thi bold bad man . 
 suffolk . and free us from hi slaveri . 
 norfolk . we had need pray , and heartili , for our deliver ; 
 or thi imperi man will work us an 
 from princ into page . all men 's honour 
 lie like one lump befor him , to be fashion 'd 
 into what pitch he pleas . 
 suffolk . for me , my lord , 
 i love him not , nor fear him-ther 's my creed ; 
 as i am made without him , so i 'll stand , 
 if the king pleas ; hi curs and hi bless 
 touch me alik ; th ' are breath i not believ in . 
 i knew him , and i know him ; so i leav him 
 to him that made him proud-th pope . 
 norfolk . let 's in ; 
 and with some other busi put the king 
 from these sad thought that work too much upon him . 
 my lord , you 'll bear us compani ? 
 chamberlain . excus me , 
 the king ha sent me otherwher ; besid , 
 you 'll find a most unfit time to disturb him . 
 health to your lordship ! 
 norfolk . thank , my good lord chamberlain . 
 exit lord chamberlain ; and the king draw 
 the curtain and sit read pensiv 
 suffolk . how sad he look ; sure , he is much afflict . 
 king . who 's there , ha ? 
 norfolk . pray god he be not angri . 
 king henri . who 's there , i say ? how dare you thrust yourselv 
 into my privat medit ? 
 who am i , ha ? 
 norfolk . a graciou king that pardon all offenc 
 malic ne'er meant . our breach of duti thi way 
 is busi of estat , in which we come 
 to know your royal pleasur . 
 king . ye are too bold . 
 go to ; i 'll make ye know your time of busi . 
 is thi an hour for tempor affair , ha ? 
 
 enter wolsey and campeiu with a commiss 
 
 who 's there ? my good lord cardin ? o my wolsey , 
 the quiet of my wound conscienc , 
 thou art a cure fit for a king . [ to campeiu ] you 're 
 welcom , 
 most learn reverend sir , into our kingdom . 
 use us and it . [ to wolsey ] my good lord , have great care 
 i be not found a talker . 
 wolsey . sir , you can not . 
 i would your grace would give us but an hour 
 of privat confer . 
 king . [ to norfolk and suffolk ] we are busi ; go . 
 norfolk . [ asid to suffolk ] thi priest ha no pride in him ! 
 suffolk . [ asid to norfolk ] not to speak of ! 
 i would not be so sick though for hi place . 
 but thi can not continu . 
 norfolk . [ asid to suffolk ] if it do , 
 i 'll ventur one have-at-him . 
 suffolk . [ asid to norfolk ] i anoth . 
 exeunt norfolk and suffolk 
 wolsey . your grace ha given a preced of wisdom 
 abov all princ , in commit freeli 
 your scrupl to the voic of christendom . 
 who can be angri now ? what envi reach you ? 
 the spaniard , tie by blood and favour to her , 
 must now confess , if they have ani good , 
 the trial just and nobl . all the clerk , 
 i mean the learn one , in christian kingdom 
 have their free voic . rome the nurs of judgment , 
 invit by your nobl self , hath sent 
 one gener tongu unto us , thi good man , 
 thi just and learn priest , cardin campeiu , 
 whom onc more i present unto your high . 
 king . and onc more in mine arm i bid him welcom , 
 and thank the holi conclav for their love . 
 they have sent me such a man i would have wish 'd for . 
 campeiu . your grace must need deserv an stranger ' love , 
 you are so nobl . to your high ' hand 
 i tender my commiss ; by whose virtue- 
 the court of rome commanding-y , my lord 
 cardin of york , are join 'd with me their servant 
 in the unparti judg of thi busi . 
 king . two equal men . the queen shall be acquaint 
 forthwith for what you come . where 's gardin ? 
 wolsey . i know your majesti ha alway lov 'd her 
 so dear in heart not to deni her that 
 a woman of less place might ask by law- 
 scholar allow 'd freeli to argu for her . 
 king . ay , and the best she shall have ; and my favour 
 to him that doe best . god forbid els . cardin , 
 prithe call gardin to me , my new secretari ; 
 i find him a fit fellow . exit wolsey 
 
 re-ent wolsey with gardin 
 
 wolsey . [ asid to gardin ] give me your hand : much 
 joy and favour to you ; 
 you are the king 's now . 
 gardin . [ asid to wolsey ] but to be command 
 for ever by your grace , whose hand ha rai 'd me . 
 king . come hither , gardin . [ walk and whisper ] 
 campeiu . my lord of york , wa not one doctor pace 
 in thi man 's place befor him ? 
 wolsey . ye , he wa . 
 campeiu . wa he not held a learn man ? 
 wolsey . ye , sure . 
 campeiu . believ me , there 's an ill opinion spread then , 
 even of yourself , lord cardin . 
 wolsey . how ! of me ? 
 campeiu . they will not stick to say you envi him 
 and , fear he would rise , he wa so virtuou , 
 kept him a foreign man still ; which so griev 'd him 
 that he ran mad and die . 
 wolsey . heav'n 's peac be with him ! 
 that 's christian care enough . for live murmur 
 there 's place of rebuk . he wa a fool , 
 for he would need be virtuou : that good fellow , 
 if i command him , follow my appoint . 
 i will have none so near els . learn thi , brother , 
 we live not to be grip 'd by meaner person . 
 king . deliv thi with modesti to th ' queen . 
 exit gardin 
 the most conveni place that i can think of 
 for such receipt of learn is blackfriar ; 
 there ye shall meet about thi weighti business- 
 my wolsey , see it furnish 'd . o , my lord , 
 would it not griev an abl man to leav 
 so sweet a bedfellow ? but , conscienc , conscienc ! 
 o , 't is a tender place ! and i must leav her . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter ann bullen and an old ladi 
 
 ann . not for that neither . here 's the pang that pinch : 
 hi high have liv 'd so long with her , and she 
 so good a ladi that no tongu could ever 
 pronounc dishonour of her-bi my life , 
 she never knew harm-doing-o , now , after 
 so mani cours of the sun enthron , 
 still grow in a majesti and pomp , the which 
 to leav a thousand-fold more bitter than 
 't is sweet at first t ' acquire-aft thi process , 
 to give her the avaunt , it is a piti 
 would move a monster . 
 old ladi . heart of most hard temper 
 melt and lament for her . 
 ann . o , god 's will ! much better 
 she ne'er had known pomp ; though't be tempor , 
 yet , if that quarrel , fortun , do divorc 
 it from the bearer , 't is a suffer pang 
 as soul and bodi 's sever . 
 old ladi . ala , poor ladi ! 
 she 's a stranger now again . 
 ann . so much the more 
 must piti drop upon her . verili , 
 i swear 't is better to be lowli born 
 and rang with humbl liver in content 
 than to be perk 'd up in a glist'r grief 
 and wear a golden sorrow . 
 old ladi . our content 
 is our best have . 
 ann . by my troth and maidenhead , 
 i would not be a queen . 
 old ladi . beshrew me , i would , 
 and ventur maidenhead for 't ; and so would you , 
 for all thi spice of your hypocrisi . 
 you that have so fair part of woman on you 
 have too a woman 's heart , which ever yet 
 affect emin , wealth , sovereignti ; 
 which , to say sooth , are bless ; and which gift , 
 save your minc , the capac 
 of your soft cheveril conscienc would receiv 
 if you might pleas to stretch it . 
 ann . nay , good troth . 
 old ladi . ye , troth and troth . you would not be a queen ! 
 ann . no , not for all the rich under heaven . 
 old ladi . 't is strang : a threepenc bow 'd would hire me , 
 old as i am , to queen it . but , i pray you , 
 what think you of a duchess ? have you limb 
 to bear that load of titl ? 
 ann . no , in truth . 
 old ladi . then you are weakli made . pluck off a littl ; 
 i would not be a young count in your way 
 for more than blush come to . if your back 
 can not vouchsaf thi burden , 't is too weak 
 ever to get a boy . 
 ann . how you do talk ! 
 i swear again i would not be a queen 
 for all the world . 
 old ladi . in faith , for littl england 
 you 'd ventur an embal . i myself 
 would for carnarvonshir , although there long 'd 
 no more to th ' crown but that . lo , who come here ? 
 
 enter the lord chamberlain 
 
 chamberlain . good morrow , ladi . what were't worth to know 
 the secret of your confer ? 
 ann . my good lord , 
 not your demand ; it valu not your ask . 
 our mistress ' sorrow we were piti . 
 chamberlain . it wa a gentl busi and becom 
 the action of good women ; there is hope 
 all will be well . 
 ann . now , i pray god , amen ! 
 chamberlain . you bear a gentl mind , and heav'nli bless 
 follow such creatur . that you may , fair ladi , 
 perceiv i speak sincer and high note 
 ta'en of your mani virtu , the king 's majesti 
 commend hi good opinion of you to you , and 
 doe purpos honour to you no less flow 
 than marchio of pembrok ; to which tide 
 a thousand pound a year , annual support , 
 out of hi grace he add . 
 ann . i do not know 
 what kind of my obedi i should tender ; 
 more than my all is noth , nor my prayer 
 are not word duli hallow , nor my wish 
 more worth than empti vaniti ; yet prayer and wish 
 are all i can return . beseech your lordship , 
 vouchsaf to speak my thank and my obedi , 
 as from a blush handmaid , to hi high ; 
 whose health and royalti i pray for . 
 chamberlain . ladi , 
 i shall not fail t ' approv the fair conceit 
 the king hath of you . [ asid ] i have peru 'd her well : 
 beauti and honour in her are so mingl 
 that they have caught the king ; and who know yet 
 but from thi ladi may proceed a gem 
 to lighten all thi isl ? -i 'll to the king 
 and say i spoke with you . 
 ann . my honour 'd lord ! exit lord chamberlain 
 old ladi . whi , thi it is : see , see ! 
 i have been beg sixteen year in court- 
 am yet a courtier beggarly-nor could 
 come pat betwixt too earli and too late 
 for ani suit of pound ; and you , o fate ! 
 a veri fresh-fish here-fi , fie , fie upon 
 thi compel 'd fortun ! -have your mouth fill 'd up 
 befor you open it . 
 ann . thi is strang to me . 
 old ladi . how tast it ? is it bitter ? forti penc , no . 
 there wa a ladi once-'ti an old story- 
 that would not be a queen , that would she not , 
 for all the mud in egypt . have you heard it ? 
 ann . come , you are pleasant . 
 old ladi . with your theme i could 
 o'ermount the lark . the marchio of pembrok ! 
 a thousand pound a year for pure respect ! 
 no other oblig ! by my life , 
 that promis moe thousand : honour 's train 
 is longer than hi foreskirt . by thi time 
 i know your back will bear a duchess . say , 
 are you not stronger than you were ? 
 ann . good ladi , 
 make yourself mirth with your particular fanci , 
 and leav me out o n't . would i had no be , 
 if thi salut my blood a jot ; it faint me 
 to think what follow . 
 the queen is comfortless , and we forget 
 in our long absenc . pray , do not deliv 
 what here y ' have heard to her . 
 old ladi . what do you think me ? exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . a hall in blackfriar 
 
 trumpet , sennet , and cornet . enter two verger , with short silver wand ; 
 next them , two scribe , in the habit of doctor ; after them , 
 the archbishop of canterburi alon ; after him , the bishop of lincoln , eli , 
 rochest , and saint asaph ; next them , with some small distanc , 
 follow a gentleman bear the purs , with the great seal , 
 and a cardin 's hat ; then two priest , bear each silver cross ; 
 then a gentleman usher barehead , accompani with a sergeant-at-arm 
 bear a silver mace ; then two gentlemen bear two great silver pillar ; 
 after them , side by side , the two cardin , wolsey and campeiu ; 
 two noblemen with the sword and mace . then enter the king and queen 
 and their train . the king take place under the cloth of state ; 
 the two cardin sit under him as judg . the queen take place 
 some distanc from the king . the bishop place themselv on each side 
 of the court , in manner of consistori ; below them the scribe . 
 the lord sit next the bishop . the rest of the attend stand 
 in conveni order about the stage 
 
 wolsey . whilst our commiss from rome is read , 
 let silenc be command . 
 king . what 's the need ? 
 it hath alreadi publicli been read , 
 and on all side th ' author allow 'd ; 
 you may then spare that time . 
 wolsey . be't so ; proceed . 
 scribe . say 'henri king of england , come into the court . ' 
 crier . henri king of england , & c. 
 king . here . 
 scribe . say 'katharin queen of england , come into the court . ' 
 crier . katharin queen of england , & c. 
 
 the queen make no answer , rise out of her chair , 
 goe about the court , come to the king , and kneel 
 at hi feet ; then speak 
 
 queen katharin . sir , i desir you do me right and justic , 
 and to bestow your piti on me ; for 
 i am a most poor woman and a stranger , 
 born out of your dominion , have here 
 no judg indiffer , nor no more assur 
 of equal friendship and proceed . ala , sir , 
 in what have i offend you ? what caus 
 hath my behaviour given to your displeasur 
 that thu you should proceed to put me of 
 and take your good grace from me ? heaven wit , 
 i have been to you a true and humbl wife , 
 at all time to your will conform , 
 ever in fear to kindl your dislik , 
 yea , subject to your countenance-glad or sorri 
 as i saw it inclin 'd . when wa the hour 
 i ever contradict your desir 
 or made it not mine too ? or which of your friend 
 have i not strove to love , although i knew 
 he were mine enemi ? what friend of mine 
 that had to him deriv 'd your anger did 
 continu in my like ? nay , gave notic 
 he wa from thenc discharg 'd ? sir , call to mind 
 that i have been your wife in thi obedi 
 upward of twenti year , and have been blest 
 with mani children by you . if , in the cours 
 and process of thi time , you can report , 
 and prove it too against mine honour , aught , 
 my bond to wedlock or my love and duti , 
 against your sacr person , in god 's name , 
 turn me away and let the foul'st contempt 
 shut door upon me , and so give me up 
 to the sharp'st kind of justic . pleas you , sir , 
 the king , your father , wa reput for 
 a princ most prudent , of an excel 
 and unmatch 'd wit and judgment ; ferdinand , 
 my father , king of spain , wa reckon 'd one 
 the wisest princ that there had reign 'd by mani 
 a year befor . it is not to be question 'd 
 that they had gather 'd a wise council to them 
 of everi realm , that did debat thi busi , 
 who deem 'd our marriag law . wherefor i humbl 
 beseech you , sir , to spare me till i may 
 be by my friend in spain advi 'd , whose counsel 
 i will implor . if not , i ' th ' name of god , 
 your pleasur be fulfil 'd ! 
 wolsey . you have here , ladi , 
 and of your choic , these reverend fathers-men 
 of singular integr and learn , 
 yea , the elect o ' th ' land , who are assembl 
 to plead your caus . it shall be therefor bootless 
 that longer you desir the court , as well 
 for your own quiet as to rectifi 
 what is unsettl in the king . 
 campeiu . hi grace 
 hath spoken well and justli ; therefor , madam , 
 it 's fit thi royal session do proceed 
 and that , without delay , their argument 
 be now produc 'd and heard . 
 queen katharin . lord cardin , 
 to you i speak . 
 wolsey . your pleasur , madam ? 
 queen katharin . sir , 
 i am about to weep ; but , think that 
 we are a queen , or long have dream 'd so , certain 
 the daughter of a king , my drop of tear 
 i 'll turn to spark of fire . 
 wolsey . be patient yet . 
 queen katharin . i will , when you are humbl ; nay , befor 
 or god will punish me . i do believ , 
 induc 'd by potent circumst , that 
 you are mine enemi , and make my challeng 
 you shall not be my judg ; for it is you 
 have blown thi coal betwixt my lord and me- 
 which god 's dew quench ! therefor i say again , 
 i utterli abhor , yea , from my soul 
 refus you for my judg , whom yet onc more 
 i hold my most malici foe and think not 
 at all a friend to truth . 
 wolsey . i do profess 
 you speak not like yourself , who ever yet 
 have stood to chariti and display 'd th ' effect 
 of disposit gentl and of wisdom 
 o'ertop woman 's pow ' r . madam , you do me wrong : 
 i have no spleen against you , nor injustic 
 for you or ani ; how far i have proceed , 
 or how far further shall , is warrant 
 by a commiss from the consistori , 
 yea , the whole consistori of rome . you charg me 
 that i have blown thi coal : i do deni it . 
 the king is present ; if it be known to him 
 that i gainsay my deed , how may he wound , 
 and worthili , my falsehood ! yea , as much 
 as you have done my truth . if he know 
 that i am free of your report , he know 
 i am not of your wrong . therefor in him 
 it lie to cure me , and the cure is to 
 remov these thought from you ; the which befor 
 hi high shall speak in , i do beseech 
 you , graciou madam , to unthink your speak 
 and to say so no more . 
 queen katharin . my lord , my lord , 
 i am a simpl woman , much too weak 
 t ' oppos your cun . y'are meek and humble-mouth 'd ; 
 you sign your place and call , in full seem , 
 with meek and humil ; but your heart 
 is cramm 'd with arrog , spleen , and pride . 
 you have , by fortun and hi high ' favour , 
 gone slightli o'er low step , and now are mount 
 where pow'r are your retain , and your word , 
 domest to you , serv your will as't pleas 
 yourself pronounc their offic . i must tell you 
 you tender more your person 's honour than 
 your high profess spiritu ; that again 
 i do refus you for my judg and here , 
 befor you all , appeal unto the pope , 
 to bring my whole caus 'fore hi holi 
 and to be judg 'd by him . 
 [ she curtsi to the king , and offer to depart ] 
 campeiu . the queen is obstin , 
 stubborn to justic , apt to accus it , and 
 disdain to be tri by't ; 't is not well . 
 she 's go away . 
 king . call her again . 
 crier . katharin queen of england , come into the court . 
 gentleman usher . madam , you are call 'd back . 
 queen katharin . what need you note it ? pray you keep your way ; 
 when you are call 'd , return . now the lord help ! 
 they vex me past my patienc . pray you pass on . 
 i will not tarri ; no , nor ever more 
 upon thi busi my appear make 
 in ani of their court . exeunt queen and her attend 
 king . go thi way , kate . 
 that man i ' th ' world who shall report he ha 
 a better wife , let him in nought be trust 
 for speak fals in that . thou art , alone- 
 if thi rare qualiti , sweet gentl , 
 thi meek saint-lik , wife-lik govern , 
 obey in command , and thi part 
 sovereign and piou els , could speak thee out- 
 the queen of earthli queen . she 's nobl born ; 
 and like her true nobil she ha 
 carri herself toward me . 
 wolsey . most graciou sir , 
 in humblest manner i requir your high 
 that it shall pleas you to declar in hear 
 of all these ears-for where i am robb 'd and bound , 
 there must i be unloo 'd , although not there 
 at onc and fulli satisfied-wheth ever i 
 did broach thi busi to your high , or 
 laid ani scrupl in your way which might 
 induc you to the question o n't , or ever 
 have to you , but with thank to god for such 
 a royal ladi , spake one the least word that might 
 be to the prejudic of her present state , 
 or touch of her good person ? 
 king . my lord cardin , 
 i do excus you ; yea , upon mine honour , 
 i free you from't . you are not to be taught 
 that you have mani enemi that know not 
 whi they are so , but , like to villag cur , 
 bark when their fellow do . by some of these 
 the queen is put in anger . y'are excu 'd . 
 but will you be more justifi ? you ever 
 have wish 'd the sleep of thi busi ; never desir 'd 
 it to be stirr 'd ; but oft have hind'r , oft , 
 the passag made toward it . on my honour , 
 i speak my good lord cardin to thi point , 
 and thu far clear him . now , what mov 'd me to't , 
 i will be bold with time and your attent . 
 then mark th ' induc . thu it came-g heed to't : 
 my conscienc first receiv 'd a tender , 
 scrupl , and prick , on certain speech utter 'd 
 by th ' bishop of bayonn , then french ambassador , 
 who had been hither sent on the debat 
 a marriag 'twixt the duke of orlean and 
 our daughter mari . i ' th ' progress of thi busi , 
 ere a determin resolut , he- 
 i mean the bishop-did requir a respit 
 wherein he might the king hi lord advertis 
 whether our daughter were legitim , 
 respect thi our marriag with the dowag , 
 sometim our brother 's wife . thi respit shook 
 the bosom of my conscienc , enter 'd me , 
 yea , with a split power , and made to trembl 
 the region of my breast , which forc 'd such way 
 that mani maz 'd consid did throng 
 and press 'd in with thi caution . first , methought 
 i stood not in the smile of heaven , who had 
 command natur that my ladi 's womb , 
 if it conceiv 'd a male child by me , should 
 do no more offic of life to't than 
 the grave doe to the dead ; for her male issu 
 or die where they were made , or shortli after 
 thi world had air 'd them . henc i took a thought 
 thi wa a judgment on me , that my kingdom , 
 well worthi the best heir o ' th ' world , should not 
 be glad i n't by me . then follow that 
 i weigh 'd the danger which my realm stood in 
 by thi my issu 's fail , and that gave to me 
 mani a groan throe . thu hull in 
 the wild sea of my conscienc , i did steer 
 toward thi remedi , whereupon we are 
 now present here togeth ; that 's to say 
 i meant to rectifi my conscienc , which 
 i then did feel full sick , and yet not well , 
 by all the reverend father of the land 
 and doctor learn 'd . first , i began in privat 
 with you , my lord of lincoln ; you rememb 
 how under my oppress i did reek , 
 when i first mov 'd you . 
 lincoln . veri well , my lieg . 
 king . i have spoke long ; be plea 'd yourself to say 
 how far you satisfi me . 
 lincoln . so pleas your high , 
 the question did at first so stagger me- 
 bear a state of mighti moment i n't 
 and consequ of dread-that i commit 
 the daring'st counsel which i had to doubt , 
 and did entreat your high to thi cours 
 which you are run here . 
 king . i then mov 'd you , 
 my lord of canterburi , and got your leav 
 to make thi present summon . unsolicit 
 i left no reverend person in thi court , 
 but by particular consent proceed 
 under your hand and seal ; therefor , go on , 
 for no dislik i ' th ' world against the person 
 of the good queen , but the sharp thorni point 
 of my alleg reason , drive thi forward . 
 prove but our marriag law , by my life 
 and kingli digniti , we are content 
 to wear our moral state to come with her , 
 katharin our queen , befor the primest creatur 
 that 's paragon 'd o ' th ' world . 
 campeiu . so pleas your high , 
 the queen be absent , 't is a need fit 
 that we adjourn thi court till further day ; 
 meanwhil must be an earnest motion 
 made to the queen to call back her appeal 
 she intend unto hi holi . 
 king . [ asid ] i may perceiv 
 these cardin trifl with me . i abhor 
 thi dilatori sloth and trick of rome . 
 my learn 'd and well-belov servant , cranmer , 
 prithe return . with thi approach i know 
 my comfort come along . -break up the court ; 
 i say , set on . exuent in manner as they enter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . the queen 's apart 
 
 enter the queen and her women , as at work 
 
 queen katharin . take thi lute , wench . my soul grow 
 sad with troubl ; 
 sing and dispers 'em , if thou canst . leav work . 
 
 song 
 
 orpheu with hi lute made tree , 
 and the mountain top that freez , 
 bow themselv when he did sing ; 
 to hi music plant and flower 
 ever sprung , as sun and shower 
 there had made a last spring . 
 
 everi thing that heard him play , 
 even the billow of the sea , 
 hung their head and then lay by . 
 in sweet music is such art , 
 kill care and grief of heart 
 fall asleep or hear die . 
 
 enter a gentleman 
 
 queen katharin . how now ? 
 gentleman . a n't pleas your grace , the two great cardin 
 wait in the presenc . 
 queen katharin . would they speak with me ? 
 gentleman . they will 'd me say so , madam . 
 queen katharin . pray their grace 
 to come near . [ exit gentleman ] what can be their busi 
 with me , a poor weak woman , fall'n from favour ? 
 i do not like their come . now i think o n't , 
 they should be good men , their affair as righteou ; 
 but all hood make not monk . 
 
 enter the two cardin , wolsey and campeiu 
 
 wolsey . peac to your high ! 
 queen katharin . your grace find me here part of housewif ; 
 i would be all , against the worst may happen . 
 what are your pleasur with me , reverend lord ? 
 wolsey . may it pleas you , nobl madam , to withdraw 
 into your privat chamber , we shall give you 
 the full caus of our come . 
 queen katharin . speak it here ; 
 there 's noth i have done yet , o ' my conscienc , 
 deserv a corner . would all other women 
 could speak thi with as free a soul as i do ! 
 my lord , i care not-so much i am happi 
 abov a number-if my action 
 were tri by ev'ri tongu , ev'ri eye saw 'em , 
 envi and base opinion set against 'em , 
 i know my life so even . if your busi 
 seek me out , and that way i am wife in , 
 out with it boldli ; truth love open deal . 
 wolsey . tanta est erga te menti integrita , regina serenis-sima- 
 queen katharin . o , good my lord , no latin ! 
 i am not such a truant sinc my come , 
 as not to know the languag i have liv 'd in ; 
 a strang tongu make my caus more strang , suspici ; 
 pray speak in english . here are some will thank you , 
 if you speak truth , for their poor mistress ' sake : 
 believ me , she ha had much wrong . lord cardin , 
 the willing'st sin i ever yet commit 
 may be absolv 'd in english . 
 wolsey . nobl ladi , 
 i am sorri my integr should breed , 
 and servic to hi majesti and you , 
 so deep suspicion , where all faith wa meant 
 we come not by the way of accus 
 to taint that honour everi good tongu bless , 
 nor to betray you ani way to sorrow- 
 you have too much , good ladi ; but to know 
 how you stand mind in the weighti differ 
 between the king and you , and to deliv , 
 like free and honest men , our just opinion 
 and comfort to your caus . 
 campeiu . most honour 'd madam , 
 my lord of york , out of hi nobl natur , 
 zeal and obedi he still bore your grace , 
 forget , like a good man , your late censur 
 both of hi truth and him-which wa too far- 
 offer , as i do , in a sign of peac , 
 hi servic and hi counsel . 
 queen katharin . [ asid ] to betray me.- 
 my lord , i thank you both for your good win ; 
 ye speak like honest men-pray god ye prove so ! 
 but how to make ye suddenli an answer , 
 in such a point of weight , so near mine honour , 
 more near my life , i fear , with my weak wit , 
 and to such men of graviti and learn , 
 in truth i know not . i wa set at work 
 among my maid , full littl , god know , look 
 either for such men or such busi . 
 for her sake that i have been-for i feel 
 the last fit of my greatness-good your grace , 
 let me have time and counsel for my caus . 
 ala , i am a woman , friendless , hopeless ! 
 wolsey . madam , you wrong the king 's love with these fear ; 
 your hope and friend are infinit . 
 queen katharin . in england 
 but littl for my profit ; can you think , lord , 
 that ani englishman dare give me counsel ? 
 or be a known friend , 'gainst hi high ' pleasure- 
 though he be grown so desper to be honest- 
 and live a subject ? nay , forsooth , my friend , 
 they that must weigh out my afflict , 
 they that my trust must grow to , live not here ; 
 they are , as all my other comfort , far henc , 
 in mine own countri , lord . 
 campeiu . i would your grace 
 would leav your grief , and take my counsel . 
 queen katharin . how , sir ? 
 campeiu . put your main caus into the king 's protect ; 
 he 's love and most graciou . 'twill be much 
 both for your honour better and your caus ; 
 for if the trial of the law o'ertak ye 
 you 'll part away disgrac 'd . 
 wolsey . he tell you rightli . 
 queen katharin . ye tell me what ye wish for both-mi ruin . 
 is thi your christian counsel ? out upon ye ! 
 heaven is abov all yet : there sit a judg 
 that no king can corrupt . 
 campeiu . your rage mistak us . 
 queen katharin . the more shame for ye ; holi men i thought ye , 
 upon my soul , two reverend cardin virtu ; 
 but cardin sin and hollow heart i fear ye . 
 mend 'em , for shame , my lord . is thi your comfort ? 
 the cordial that ye bring a wretch lady- 
 a woman lost among ye , laugh 'd at , scorn 'd ? 
 i will not wish ye half my miseri : 
 i have more chariti ; but say i warn ye . 
 take heed , for heaven 's sake take heed , lest at onc 
 the burden of my sorrow fall upon ye . 
 wolsey . madam , thi is a mere distract ; 
 you turn the good we offer into envi . 
 queen katharin . ye turn me into noth . woe upon ye , 
 and all such fals professor ! would you have me- 
 if you have ani justic , ani piti , 
 if ye be ani thing but churchmen 's habits- 
 put my sick caus into hi hand that hate me ? 
 ala ! ha banish 'd me hi bed alreadi , 
 hi love too long ago ! i am old , my lord , 
 and all the fellowship i hold now with him 
 is onli my obedi . what can happen 
 to me abov thi wretched ? all your studi 
 make me a curs like thi . 
 campeiu . your fear are wors . 
 queen katharin . have i liv 'd thu long-let me speak myself , 
 sinc virtu find no friends-a wife , a true one ? 
 a woman , i dare say without vain-glori , 
 never yet brand with suspicion ? 
 have i with all my full affect 
 still met the king , lov 'd him next heav'n , obey 'd him , 
 been , out of fond , superstiti to him , 
 almost forgot my prayer to content him , 
 and am i thu reward ? 't is not well , lord . 
 bring me a constant woman to her husband , 
 one that ne'er dream 'd a joy beyond hi pleasur , 
 and to that woman , when she ha done most , 
 yet will i add an honour-a great patienc . 
 wolsey . madam , you wander from the good we aim at . 
 queen katharin . my lord , i dare not make myself so guilti , 
 to give up willingli that nobl titl 
 your master wed me to : noth but death 
 shall e'er divorc my digniti . 
 wolsey . pray hear me . 
 queen katharin . would i had never trod thi english earth , 
 or felt the flatteri that grow upon it ! 
 ye have angel ' face , but heaven know your heart . 
 what will becom of me now , wretch ladi ? 
 i am the most unhappi woman live . 
 [ to her women ] ala , poor wench , where are now 
 your fortun ? 
 shipwreck 'd upon a kingdom , where no piti , 
 no friend , no hope ; no kindr weep for me ; 
 almost no grave allow 'd me . like the my , 
 that onc wa mistress of the field , and flourish 'd , 
 i 'll hang my head and perish . 
 wolsey . if your grace 
 could but be brought to know our end are honest , 
 you 'd feel more comfort . whi should we , good ladi , 
 upon what caus , wrong you ? ala , our place , 
 the way of our profess is against it ; 
 we are to cure such sorrow , not to sow 'em . 
 for good ' sake , consid what you do ; 
 how you may hurt yourself , ay , utterli 
 grow from the king 's acquaint , by thi carriag . 
 the heart of princ kiss obedi , 
 so much they love it ; but to stubborn spirit 
 they swell and grow as terribl as storm . 
 i know you have a gentl , nobl temper , 
 a soul as even as a calm . pray think us 
 those we profess , peace-mak , friend , and servant . 
 campeiu . madam , you 'll find it so . you wrong your virtu 
 with these weak women 's fear . a nobl spirit , 
 as your wa put into you , ever cast 
 such doubt as fals coin from it . the king love you ; 
 bewar you lose it not . for us , if you pleas 
 to trust us in your busi , we are readi 
 to use our utmost studi in your servic . 
 queen katharin . do what ye will my lord ; and pray 
 forgiv me 
 if i have us 'd myself unmannerli ; 
 you know i am a woman , lack wit 
 to make a seemli answer to such person . 
 pray do my servic to hi majesti ; 
 he ha my heart yet , and shall have my prayer 
 while i shall have my life . come , reverend father , 
 bestow your counsel on me ; she now beg 
 that littl thought , when she set foot here , 
 she should have bought her digniti so dear . exeunt 
 
 
 
 act iii.scen < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the duke of norfolk , the duke of suffolk , the earl of surrey , 
 and the lord chamberlain 
 
 norfolk . if you will now unit in your complaint 
 and forc them with a constanc , the cardin 
 can not stand under them : if you omit 
 the offer of thi time , i can not promis 
 but that you shall sustain moe new disgrac 
 with these you bear alreadi . 
 surrey . i am joy 
 to meet the least occas that may give me 
 remembr of my father-in-law , the duke , 
 to be reveng 'd on him . 
 suffolk . which of the peer 
 have uncontemn 'd gone by him , or at least 
 strang neglect ? when did he regard 
 the stamp of nobl in ani person 
 out of himself ? 
 chamberlain . my lord , you speak your pleasur . 
 what he deserv of you and me i know ; 
 what we can do to him-though now the time 
 give way to us-i much fear . if you can not 
 bar hi access to th ' king , never attempt 
 anyth on him ; for he hath a witchcraft 
 over the king in 's tongu . 
 norfolk . o , fear him not ! 
 hi spell in that is out ; the king hath found 
 matter against him that for ever mar 
 the honey of hi languag . no , he 's settl , 
 not to come off , in hi displeasur . 
 surrey . sir , 
 i should be glad to hear such news as thi 
 onc everi hour . 
 norfolk . believ it , thi is true : 
 in the divorc hi contrari proceed 
 are all unfold ; wherein he appear 
 as i would wish mine enemi . 
 surrey . how came 
 hi practic to light ? 
 suffolk . most strang . 
 surrey . o , how , how ? 
 suffolk . the cardin 's letter to the pope miscarri , 
 and came to th ' eye o ' th ' king ; wherein wa read 
 how that the cardin did entreat hi holi 
 to stay the judgment o ' th ' divorc ; for if 
 it did take place , ' i do ' quoth he 'perceiv 
 my king is tangl in affect to 
 a creatur of the queen 's , ladi ann bullen . ' 
 surrey . ha the king thi ? 
 suffolk . believ it . 
 surrey . will thi work ? 
 chamberlain . the king in thi perceiv him how he coast 
 and hedg hi own way . but in thi point 
 all hi trick founder , and he bring hi physic 
 after hi patient 's death : the king alreadi 
 hath marri the fair ladi . 
 surrey . would he had ! 
 suffolk . may you be happi in your wish , my lord ! 
 for , i profess , you have it . 
 surrey . now , all my joy 
 trace the conjunct ! 
 suffolk . my amen to't ! 
 norfolk . an men 's ! 
 suffolk . there 's order given for her coron ; 
 marri , thi is yet but young , and may be left 
 to some ear unrecount . but , my lord , 
 she is a gallant creatur , and complet 
 in mind and featur . i persuad me from her 
 will fall some bless to thi land , which shall 
 in it be memoriz 'd . 
 surrey . but will the king 
 digest thi letter of the cardin 's ? 
 the lord forbid ! 
 norfolk . marri , amen ! 
 suffolk . no , no ; 
 there be moe wasp that buzz about hi nose 
 will make thi sting the sooner . cardin campeiu 
 is stol'n away to rome ; hath ta'en no leav ; 
 ha left the caus o ' th ' king unhandl , and 
 is post , as the agent of our cardin , 
 to second all hi plot . i do assur you 
 the king cri 'ha ! ' at thi . 
 chamberlain . now , god incens him , 
 and let him cri 'ha ! ' louder ! 
 norfolk . but , my lord , 
 when return cranmer ? 
 suffolk . he is return 'd in hi opinion ; which 
 have satisfi the king for hi divorc , 
 togeth with all famou colleg 
 almost in christendom . shortli , i believ , 
 hi second marriag shall be publish 'd , and 
 her coron . katharin no more 
 shall be call 'd queen , but princess dowag 
 and widow to princ arthur . 
 norfolk . thi same cranmer 's 
 a worthi fellow , and hath ta'en much pain 
 in the king 's busi . 
 suffolk . he ha ; and we shall see him 
 for it an archbishop . 
 norfolk . so i hear . 
 suffolk . 't is so . 
 
 enter wolsey and cromwel 
 
 the cardin ! 
 norfolk . observ , observ , he 's moodi . 
 wolsey . the packet , cromwel , 
 gave't you the king ? 
 cromwel . to hi own hand , in 's bedchamb . 
 wolsey . look 'd he o ' th ' insid of the paper ? 
 cromwel . present 
 he did unseal them ; and the first he view 'd , 
 he did it with a seriou mind ; a heed 
 wa in hi counten . you he bade 
 attend him here thi morn . 
 wolsey . is he readi 
 to come abroad ? 
 cromwel . i think by thi he is . 
 wolsey . leav me awhil . exit cromwel 
 [ asid ] it shall be to the duchess of alencon , 
 the french king 's sister ; he shall marri her . 
 ann bullen ! no , i 'll no ann bullen for him ; 
 there 's more i n't than fair visag . bullen ! 
 no , we 'll no bullen . speedili i wish 
 to hear from rome . the marchio of pembrok ! 
 norfolk . he 's discont . 
 suffolk . may be he hear the king 
 doe whet hi anger to him . 
 surrey . sharp enough , 
 lord , for thi justic ! 
 wolsey . [ asid ] the late queen 's gentlewoman , a knight 's 
 daughter , 
 to be her mistress ' mistress ! the queen 's queen ! 
 thi candl burn not clear . 't is i must snuff it ; 
 then out it goe . what though i know her virtuou 
 and well deserv ? yet i know her for 
 a spleeni lutheran ; and not wholesom to 
 our caus that she should lie i ' th ' bosom of 
 our hard-rul 'd king . again , there is sprung up 
 an heret , an arch one , cranmer ; one 
 hath crawl 'd into the favour of the king , 
 and is hi oracl . 
 norfolk . he is vex 'd at someth . 
 
 enter the king , read of a schedul , and lovel 
 
 surrey . i would 'twere someth that would fret the string , 
 the master-cord on 's heart ! 
 suffolk . the king , the king ! 
 king . what pile of wealth hath he accumul 
 to hi own portion ! and what expens by th ' hour 
 seem to flow from him ! how , i ' th ' name of thrift , 
 doe he rake thi togeth ? -now , my lord , 
 saw you the cardin ? 
 norfolk . my lord , we have 
 stood here observ him . some strang commot 
 is in hi brain : he bite hi lip and start , 
 stop on a sudden , look upon the ground , 
 then lay hi finger on hi templ ; straight 
 spring out into fast gait ; then stop again , 
 strike hi breast hard ; and anon he cast 
 hi eye against the moon . in most strang postur 
 we have seen him set himself . 
 king . it may well be 
 there is a mutini in 's mind . thi morn 
 paper of state he sent me to perus , 
 as i requir 'd ; and wot you what i found 
 there-on my conscienc , put unwittingli ? 
 forsooth , an inventori , thu import 
 the sever parcel of hi plate , hi treasur , 
 rich stuff , and ornament of household ; which 
 i find at such proud rate that it outspeak 
 possess of a subject . 
 norfolk . it 's heaven 's will ; 
 some spirit put thi paper in the packet 
 to bless your eye withal . 
 king . if we did think 
 hi contempl were abov the earth 
 and fix 'd on spiritu object , he should still 
 dwell in hi muse ; but i am afraid 
 hi think are below the moon , not worth 
 hi seriou consid . 
 [ the king take hi seat and whisper lovel , 
 who goe to the cardin ] 
 wolsey . heaven forgiv me ! 
 ever god bless your high ! 
 king . good , my lord , 
 you are full of heavenli stuff , and bear the inventori 
 of your best grace in your mind ; the which 
 you were now run o'er . you have scarc time 
 to steal from spiritu leisur a brief span 
 to keep your earthli audit ; sure , in that 
 i deem you an ill husband , and am glad 
 to have you therein my companion . 
 wolsey . sir , 
 for holi offic i have a time ; a time 
 to think upon the part of busi which 
 i bear i ' th ' state ; and natur doe requir 
 her time of preserv , which perforc 
 i , her frail son , amongst my brethren mortal , 
 must give my tendanc to . 
 king . you have said well . 
 wolsey . and ever may your high yoke togeth , 
 as i will lend you caus , my do well 
 with my well say ! 
 king . 't is well said again ; 
 and 't is a kind of good deed to say well ; 
 and yet word are no deed . my father lov 'd you : 
 he said he did ; and with hi deed did crown 
 hi word upon you . sinc i had my offic 
 i have kept you next my heart ; have not alon 
 employ 'd you where high profit might come home , 
 but par 'd my present have to bestow 
 my bounti upon you . 
 wolsey . [ asid ] what should thi mean ? 
 surrey . [ asid ] the lord increas thi busi ! 
 king . have i not made you 
 the prime man of the state ? i pray you tell me 
 if what i now pronounc you have found true ; 
 and , if you may confess it , say withal 
 if you are bound to us or no . what say you ? 
 wolsey . my sovereign , i confess your royal grace , 
 show ' r 'd on me daili , have been more than could 
 my studi purpos requit ; which went 
 beyond all man 's endeavour . my endeavour , 
 have ever come too short of my desir , 
 yet fil 'd with my abil ; mine own end 
 have been mine so that evermor they point 
 to th ' good of your most sacr person and 
 the profit of the state . for your great grace 
 heap 'd upon me , poor undeserv , i 
 can noth render but allegi thank ; 
 my pray'r to heaven for you ; my loyalti , 
 which ever ha and ever shall be grow , 
 till death , that winter , kill it . 
 king . fairli answer 'd ! 
 a loyal and obedi subject is 
 therein illustr ; the honour of it 
 doe pay the act of it , as , i ' th ' contrari , 
 the foul is the punish . i presum 
 that , as my hand ha open 'd bounti to you , 
 my heart dropp 'd love , my pow ' r rain 'd honour , more 
 on you than ani , so your hand and heart , 
 your brain , and everi function of your power , 
 should , notwithstand that your bond of duti , 
 as 'twere in love 's particular , be more 
 to me , your friend , than ani . 
 wolsey . i do profess 
 that for your high ' good i ever labour 'd 
 more than mine own ; that am , have , and will be- 
 though all the world should crack their duti to you , 
 and throw it from their soul ; though peril did 
 abound as thick as thought could make 'em , and 
 appear in form more horrid-yet my duti , 
 as doth a rock against the chide flood , 
 should the approach of thi wild river break , 
 and stand unshaken your . 
 king . 't is nobli spoken . 
 take notic , lord , he ha a loyal breast , 
 for you have seen him open 't . read o'er thi ; 
 [ give him paper ] 
 and after , thi ; and then to breakfast with 
 what appetit you have . 
 exit the king , frown upon the cardin ; the nobl 
 throng after him , smile and whisper 
 wolsey . what should thi mean ? 
 what sudden anger 's thi ? how have i reap 'd it ? 
 he part frown from me , as if ruin 
 leap 'd from hi eye ; so look the chafe lion 
 upon the dare huntsman that ha gall 'd him- 
 then make him noth . i must read thi paper ; 
 i fear , the stori of hi anger . 't is so ; 
 thi paper ha undon me . 't is th ' account 
 of all that world of wealth i have drawn togeth 
 for mine own end ; inde to gain the popedom , 
 and fee my friend in rome . o neglig , 
 fit for a fool to fall by ! what cross devil 
 made me put thi main secret in the packet 
 i sent the king ? is there no way to cure thi ? 
 no new devic to beat thi from hi brain ? 
 i know 'twill stir him strongli ; yet i know 
 a way , if it take right , in spite of fortun , 
 will bring me off again . what 's thi ? 'to th ' pope . ' 
 the letter , as i live , with all the busi 
 i writ to 's holi . nay then , farewel ! 
 i have touch 'd the highest point of all my great , 
 and from that full meridian of my glori 
 i hast now to my set . i shall fall 
 like a bright exhal in the even , 
 and no man see me more . 
 
 re-ent to wolsey the duke of norfolk and 
 suffolk , the earl of surrey , and the lord 
 chamberlain 
 
 norfolk . hear the king 's pleasur , cardin , who command you 
 to render up the great seal present 
 into our hand , and to confin yourself 
 to asher hous , my lord of winchest 's , 
 till you hear further from hi high . 
 wolsey . stay : 
 where 's your commiss , lord ? word can not carri 
 author so weighti . 
 suffolk . who dare cross 'em , 
 bear the king 's will from hi mouth expressli ? 
 wolsey . till i find more than will or word to do it- 
 i mean your malice-know , offici lord , 
 i dare and must deni it . now i feel 
 of what coars metal ye are moulded-envi ; 
 how eagerli ye follow my disgrac , 
 as if it fed ye ; and how sleek and wanton 
 ye appear in everi thing may bring my ruin ! 
 follow your enviou cours , men of malic ; 
 you have christian warrant for 'em , and no doubt 
 in time will find their fit reward . that seal 
 you ask with such a violenc , the king- 
 mine and your master-with hi own hand gave me ; 
 bade me enjoy it , with the place and honour , 
 dure my life ; and , to confirm hi good , 
 tie it by letters-pat . now , who 'll take it ? 
 surrey . the king , that gave it . 
 wolsey . it must be himself then . 
 surrey . thou art a proud traitor , priest . 
 wolsey . proud lord , thou liest . 
 within these forti hour surrey durst better 
 have burnt that tongu than said so . 
 surrey . thi ambit , 
 thou scarlet sin , robb 'd thi bewail land 
 of nobl buckingham , my father-in-law . 
 the head of all thi brother cardin , 
 with thee and all thi best part bound togeth , 
 weigh 'd not a hair of hi . plagu of your polici ! 
 you sent me deputi for ireland ; 
 far from hi succour , from the king , from all 
 that might have merci on the fault thou gav'st him ; 
 whilst your great good , out of holi piti , 
 absolv 'd him with an axe . 
 wolsey . thi , and all els 
 thi talk lord can lay upon my credit , 
 i answer is most fals . the duke by law 
 found hi desert ; how innoc i wa 
 from ani privat malic in hi end , 
 hi nobl juri and foul caus can wit . 
 if i lov 'd mani word , lord , i should tell you 
 you have as littl honesti as honour , 
 that in the way of loyalti and truth 
 toward the king , my ever royal master , 
 dare mate a sounder man than surrey can be 
 and an that love hi folli . 
 surrey . by my soul , 
 your long coat , priest , protect you ; thou shouldst feel 
 my sword i ' the life-blood of thee els . my lord 
 can ye endur to hear thi arrog ? 
 and from thi fellow ? if we live thu tame , 
 to be thu jade by a piec of scarlet , 
 farewel nobil ! let hi grace go forward 
 and dare us with hi cap like lark . 
 wolsey . all good 
 is poison to thi stomach . 
 surrey . ye , that good 
 of glean all the land 's wealth into one , 
 into your own hand , cardin , by extort ; 
 the good of your intercept packet 
 you writ to th ' pope against the king ; your good , 
 sinc you provok me , shall be most notori . 
 my lord of norfolk , as you are truli nobl , 
 as you respect the common good , the state 
 of our despi 'd nobil , our issu , 
 whom , if he live , will scarc be gentlemen- 
 produc the grand sum of hi sin , the articl 
 collect from hi life . i 'll startl you 
 wors than the sacr bell , when the brown wench 
 lay kiss in your arm , lord cardin . 
 wolsey . how much , methink , i could despis thi man , 
 but that i am bound in chariti against it ! 
 norfolk . those articl , my lord , are in the king 's hand ; 
 but , thu much , they are foul one . 
 wolsey . so much fairer 
 and spotless shall mine innoc aris , 
 when the king know my truth . 
 surrey . thi can not save you . 
 i thank my memori i yet rememb 
 some of these articl ; and out they shall . 
 now , if you can blush and cri guilti , cardin , 
 you 'll show a littl honesti . 
 wolsey . speak on , sir ; 
 i dare your worst object . if i blush , 
 it is to see a nobleman want manner . 
 surrey . i had rather want those than my head . have at you ! 
 first , that without the king 's assent or knowledg 
 you wrought to be a legat ; by which power 
 you maim 'd the jurisdict of all bishop . 
 norfolk . then , that in all you writ to rome , or els 
 to foreign princ , 'ego et rex meu ' 
 wa still inscrib 'd ; in which you brought the king 
 to be your servant . 
 suffolk . then , that without the knowledg 
 either of king or council , when you went 
 ambassador to the emperor , you made bold 
 to carri into flander the great seal . 
 surrey . item , you sent a larg commiss 
 to gregori de cassado , to conclud , 
 without the king 's will or the state 's allow , 
 a leagu between hi high and ferrara . 
 suffolk . that out of mere ambit you have cau 'd 
 your holi hat to be stamp 'd on the king 's coin . 
 surrey . then , that you have sent innumer substanc , 
 by what mean got i leav to your own conscienc , 
 to furnish rome and to prepar the way 
 you have for digniti , to the mere undo 
 of all the kingdom . mani more there are , 
 which , sinc they are of you , and odiou , 
 i will not taint my mouth with . 
 chamberlain . o my lord , 
 press not a fall man too far ! 't is virtu . 
 hi fault lie open to the law ; let them , 
 not you , correct him . my heart weep to see him 
 so littl of hi great self . 
 surrey . i forgiv him . 
 suffolk . lord cardin , the king 's further pleasur is- 
 becaus all those thing you have done of late , 
 by your power legatin within thi kingdom , 
 fall into th ' compass of a praemunire- 
 that therefor such a writ be su against you : 
 to forfeit all your good , land , tenement , 
 chattel , and whatsoev , and to be 
 out of the king 's protect . thi is my charg . 
 norfolk . and so we 'll leav you to your medit 
 how to live better . for your stubborn answer 
 about the give back the great seal to us , 
 the king shall know it , and , no doubt , shall thank you . 
 so fare you well , my littl good lord cardin . 
 exeunt all but wolsey 
 wolsey . so farewel to the littl good you bear me . 
 farewel , a long farewel , to all my great ! 
 thi is the state of man : to-day he put forth 
 the tender leav of hope ; to-morrow blossom 
 and bear hi blush honour thick upon him ; 
 the third day come a frost , a kill frost , 
 and when he think , good easi man , full sure 
 hi great is a-ripen , nip hi root , 
 and then he fall , as i do . i have ventur 'd , 
 like littl wanton boy that swim on bladder , 
 thi mani summer in a sea of glori ; 
 but far beyond my depth . my high-blown pride 
 at length broke under me , and now ha left me , 
 weari and old with servic , to the merci 
 of a rude stream , that must for ever hide me . 
 vain pomp and glori of thi world , i hate ye ; 
 i feel my heart new open 'd . o , how wretch 
 is that poor man that hang on princ ' favour ! 
 there is betwixt that smile we would aspir to , 
 that sweet aspect of princ , and their ruin 
 more pang and fear than war or women have ; 
 and when he fall , he fall like lucif , 
 never to hope again . 
 
 enter cromwel , stand amaz 
 
 whi , how now , cromwel ! 
 cromwel . i have no power to speak , sir . 
 wolsey . what , amaz 'd 
 at my misfortun ? can thi spirit wonder 
 a great man should declin ? nay , an you weep , 
 i am fall'n inde . 
 cromwel . how doe your grace ? 
 wolsey . whi , well ; 
 never so truli happi , my good cromwel . 
 i know myself now , and i feel within me 
 a peac abov all earthli digniti , 
 a still and quiet conscienc . the king ha cur 'd me , 
 i humbl thank hi grace ; and from these shoulder , 
 these ruin 'd pillar , out of piti , taken 
 a load would sink a navy-too much honour . 
 o , 't is a burden , cromwel , 't is a burden 
 too heavi for a man that hope for heaven ! 
 cromwel . i am glad your grace ha made that right use of it . 
 wolsey . i hope i have . i am abl now , methink , 
 out of a fortitud of soul i feel , 
 to endur more miseri and greater far 
 than my weak-heart enemi dare offer . 
 what news abroad ? 
 cromwel . the heaviest and the worst 
 is your displeasur with the king . 
 wolsey . god bless him ! 
 cromwel . the next is that sir thoma more is chosen 
 lord chancellor in your place . 
 wolsey . that 's somewhat sudden . 
 but he 's a learn man . may he continu 
 long in hi high ' favour , and do justic 
 for truth 's sake and hi conscienc ; that hi bone 
 when he ha run hi cours and sleep in bless , 
 may have a tomb of orphan ' tear wept on him ! 
 what more ? 
 cromwel . that cranmer is return 'd with welcom , 
 instal 'd lord archbishop of canterburi . 
 wolsey . that 's news inde . 
 cromwel . last , that the ladi ann , 
 whom the king hath in secreci long marri , 
 thi day wa view 'd in open as hi queen , 
 go to chapel ; and the voic is now 
 onli about her coron . 
 wolsey . there wa the weight that pull 'd me down . 
 o cromwel , 
 the king ha gone beyond me . all my glori 
 in that one woman i have lost for ever . 
 no sun shall ever usher forth mine honour , 
 or gild again the nobl troop that wait 
 upon my smile . go get thee from me , cromwel ; 
 i am a poor fall'n man , unworthi now 
 to be thi lord and master . seek the king ; 
 that sun , i pray , may never set ! i have told him 
 what and how true thou art . he will advanc thee ; 
 some littl memori of me will stir him- 
 i know hi nobl nature-not to let 
 thi hope servic perish too . good cromwel , 
 neglect him not ; make use now , and provid 
 for thine own futur safeti . 
 cromwel . o my lord , 
 must i then leav you ? must i need forgo 
 so good , so nobl , and so true a master ? 
 bear wit , all that have not heart of iron , 
 with what a sorrow cromwel leav hi lord . 
 the king shall have my servic ; but my prayer 
 for ever and for ever shall be your . 
 wolsey . cromwel , i did not think to shed a tear 
 in all my miseri ; but thou hast forc 'd me , 
 out of thi honest truth , to play the woman . 
 let 's dri our eye ; and thu far hear me , cromwel , 
 and when i am forgotten , as i shall be , 
 and sleep in dull cold marbl , where no mention 
 of me more must be heard of , say i taught thee- 
 say wolsey , that onc trod the way of glori , 
 and sound all the depth and shoal of honour , 
 found thee a way , out of hi wreck , to rise in- 
 a sure and safe one , though thi master miss 'd it . 
 mark but my fall and that that ruin 'd me . 
 cromwel , i charg thee , fling away ambit : 
 by that sin fell the angel . how can man then , 
 the imag of hi maker , hope to win by it ? 
 love thyself last ; cherish those heart that hate thee ; 
 corrupt win not more than honesti . 
 still in thi right hand carri gentl peac 
 to silenc enviou tongu . be just , and fear not ; 
 let all the end thou aim'st at be thi countri 's , 
 thi god 's , and truth 's ; then , if thou fall'st , o cromwel , 
 thou fall'st a bless martyr ! 
 serv the king , and-prithe lead me in . 
 there take an inventori of all i have 
 to the last penni ; 't is the king 's . my robe , 
 and my integr to heaven , is all 
 i dare now call mine own . o cromwel , cromwel ! 
 had i but serv 'd my god with half the zeal 
 i serv 'd my king , he would not in mine age 
 have left me nake to mine enemi . 
 cromwel . good sir , have patienc . 
 wolsey . so i have . farewel 
 the hope of court ! my hope in heaven do dwell . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 
 a street in westminst 
 
 enter two gentlemen , meet one anoth 
 
 first gentleman . y'are well met onc again . 
 second gentleman . so are you . 
 first gentleman . you come to take your stand here , and 
 behold 
 the ladi ann pass from her coron ? 
 second gentleman . 't is all my busi . at our last encount 
 the duke of buckingham came from hi trial . 
 first gentleman . 't is veri true . but that time offer 'd 
 sorrow ; 
 thi , gener joy . 
 second gentleman . 't is well . the citizen , 
 i am sure , have shown at full their royal minds- 
 as , let 'em have their right , they are ever forward- 
 in celebr of thi day with show , 
 pageant , and sight of honour . 
 first gentleman . never greater , 
 nor , i 'll assur you , better taken , sir . 
 second gentleman . may i be bold to ask what that contain , 
 that paper in your hand ? 
 first gentleman . ye ; 't is the list 
 of those that claim their offic thi day , 
 by custom of the coron . 
 the duke of suffolk is the first , and claim 
 to be high steward ; next , the duke of norfolk , 
 he to be earl marshal . you may read the rest . 
 second gentleman . i thank you , sir ; had i not known 
 those custom , 
 i should have been behold to your paper . 
 but , i beseech you , what 's becom of katharin , 
 the princess dowag ? how goe her busi ? 
 first gentleman . that i can tell you too . the archbishop 
 of canterburi , accompani with other 
 learn and reverend father of hi order , 
 held a late court at dunstabl , six mile of 
 from ampthil , where the princess lay ; to which 
 she wa often cite by them , but appear 'd not . 
 and , to be short , for not appear and 
 the king 's late scrupl , by the main assent 
 of all these learn men , she wa divorc 'd , 
 and the late marriag made of none effect ; 
 sinc which she wa remov to kimbolton , 
 where she remain now sick . 
 second gentleman . ala , good ladi ! [ trumpet ] 
 the trumpet sound . stand close , the queen is come . 
 [ hautboy ] 
 
 the order of the coron . 
 
 < num > . a live flourish of trumpet . 
 < num > . then two judg . 
 < num > . lord chancellor , with purs and mace befor him . 
 < num > . chorist sing . [ music ] 
 < num > . mayor of london , bear the mace . then garter , in 
 hi coat of arm , and on hi head he wore a gilt copper 
 crown . 
 < num > . marqui dorset , bear a sceptr of gold , on hi head a 
 demi-coron of gold . with him , the earl of surrey , 
 bear the rod of silver with the dove , crown with an 
 earl 's coronet . collar of ess . 
 < num > . duke of suffolk , in hi robe of estat , hi coronet on 
 hi head , bear a long white wand , as high steward . 
 with him , the duke of norfolk , with the rod of 
 marshalship , a coronet on hi head . collar of ess . 
 < num > . a canopi born by four of the cinque-port ; under it 
 the queen in her robe ; in her hair richli adorn with 
 pearl , crown . on each side her , the bishop of london 
 and winchest . 
 < num > . the old duchess of norfolk , in a coron of gold 
 wrought with flower , bear the queen 's train . 
 < num > . certain ladi or countess , with plain circlet of gold 
 without flower . 
 
 exeunt , first pass over the stage in order and state , 
 and then a great flourish of trumpet 
 
 second gentleman . a royal train , believ me . these know . 
 who 's that that bear the sceptr ? 
 first gentleman . marqui dorset ; 
 and that the earl of surrey , with the rod . 
 second gentleman . a bold brave gentleman . that should be 
 the duke of suffolk ? 
 first gentleman . 't is the same-high steward . 
 second gentleman . and that my lord of norfolk ? 
 first gentleman . ye . 
 second gentleman . [ look on the queen ] heaven 
 bless thee ! 
 thou hast the sweetest face i ever look 'd on . 
 sir , as i have a soul , she is an angel ; 
 our king ha all the indi in hi arm , 
 and more and richer , when he strain that ladi ; 
 i can not blame hi conscienc . 
 first gentleman . they that bear 
 the cloth of honour over her are four baron 
 of the cinque-port . 
 second gentleman . those men are happi ; and so are all 
 are near her . 
 i take it she that carri up the train 
 is that old nobl ladi , duchess of norfolk . 
 first gentleman . it is ; and all the rest are countess . 
 second gentleman . their coronet say so . these are star inde , 
 and sometim fall one . 
 first gentleman . no more of that . 
 exit process , with a great flourish of trumpet 
 
 enter a third gentleman 
 
 god save you , sir ! where have you been broil ? 
 third gentleman . among the crowd i ' th ' abbey , where a finger 
 could not be wedg 'd in more ; i am stifl 
 with the mere rank of their joy . 
 second gentleman . you saw 
 the ceremoni ? 
 third gentleman . that i did . 
 first gentleman . how wa it ? 
 third gentleman . well worth the see . 
 second gentleman . good sir , speak it to us . 
 third gentleman . as well as i am abl . the rich stream 
 of lord and ladi , have brought the queen 
 to a prepar 'd place in the choir , fell of 
 a distanc from her , while her grace sat down 
 to rest awhil , some half an hour or so , 
 in a rich chair of state , oppos freeli 
 the beauti of her person to the peopl . 
 believ me , sir , she is the goodliest woman 
 that ever lay by man ; which when the peopl 
 had the full view of , such a nois aros 
 as the shroud make at sea in a stiff tempest , 
 as loud , and to as mani tune ; hat , cloaks- 
 doublet , i think-flew up , and had their face 
 been loos , thi day they had been lost . such joy 
 i never saw befor . great-belli women , 
 that had not half a week to go , like ram 
 in the old time of war , would shake the press , 
 and make 'em reel befor 'em . no man live 
 could say 'thi is my wife ' there , all were woven 
 so strang in one piec . 
 second gentleman . but what follow 'd ? 
 third gentleman . at length her grace rose , and with 
 modest pace 
 came to the altar , where she kneel 'd , and saintlik 
 cast her fair eye to heaven , and pray 'd devoutli . 
 then rose again , and bow 'd her to the peopl ; 
 when by the archbishop of canterburi 
 she had all the royal make of a queen : 
 as holi oil , edward confessor 's crown , 
 the rod , and bird of peac , and all such emblem 
 laid nobli on her ; which perform 'd , the choir , 
 with all the choicest music of the kingdom , 
 togeth sung 'te deum . ' so she part , 
 and with the same full state pac 'd back again 
 to york place , where the feast is held . 
 first gentleman . sir , 
 you must no more call it york place : that 's past : 
 for sinc the cardin fell that titl 's lost . 
 't is now the king 's , and call whitehal . 
 third gentleman . i know it ; 
 but 't is so late alter 'd that the old name 
 is fresh about me . 
 second gentleman . what two reverend bishop 
 were those that went on each side of the queen ? 
 third gentleman . stokesli and gardin : the one of winchest , 
 newli preferr 'd from the king 's secretari ; 
 the other , london . 
 second gentleman . he of winchest 
 is held no great good lover of the archbishop 's , 
 the virtuou cranmer . 
 third gentleman . all the land know that ; 
 howev , yet there is no great breach . when it come , 
 cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him . 
 second gentleman . who may that be , i pray you ? 
 third gentleman . thoma cromwel , 
 a man in much esteem with th ' king , and truli 
 a worthi friend . the king ha made him master 
 o ' th ' jewel hous , 
 and one , alreadi , of the privi council . 
 second gentleman . he will deserv more . 
 third gentleman . ye , without all doubt . 
 come , gentlemen , ye shall go my way , which 
 is to th ' court , and there ye shall be my guest : 
 someth i can command . as i walk thither , 
 i 'll tell ye more . 
 both . you may command us , sir . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 
 kimbolton 
 
 enter katharin , dowag , sick ; led between griffith , her gentleman usher , 
 and patienc , her woman 
 
 griffith . how doe your grace ? 
 katharin . o griffith , sick to death ! 
 my leg like loaden branch bow to th ' earth , 
 will to leav their burden . reach a chair . 
 so-now , methink , i feel a littl eas . 
 didst thou not tell me , griffith , as thou led'st me , 
 that the great child of honour , cardin wolsey , 
 wa dead ? 
 griffith . ye , madam ; but i think your grace , 
 out of the pain you suffer 'd , gave no ear to't . 
 katharin . prithe , good griffith , tell me how he die . 
 if well , he stepp 'd befor me , happili , 
 for my exampl . 
 griffith . well , the voic goe , madam ; 
 for after the stout earl northumberland 
 arrest him at york and brought him forward , 
 as a man sore taint , to hi answer , 
 he fell sick suddenli , and grew so ill 
 he could not sit hi mule . 
 katharin . ala , poor man ! 
 griffith . at last , with easi road , he came to leicest , 
 lodg 'd in the abbey ; where the reverend abbot , 
 with all hi covent , honour receiv 'd him ; 
 to whom he gave these word : ' o father abbot , 
 an old man , broken with the storm of state , 
 is come to lay hi weari bone among ye ; 
 give him a littl earth for chariti ! ' 
 so went to bed ; where eagerli hi sick 
 pursu 'd him still and three night after thi , 
 about the hour of eight-which he himself 
 foretold should be hi last-ful of repent , 
 continu medit , tear , and sorrow , 
 he gave hi honour to the world again , 
 hi bless part to heaven , and slept in peac . 
 katharin . so may he rest ; hi fault lie gentli on him ! 
 yet thu far , griffith , give me leav to speak him , 
 and yet with chariti . he wa a man 
 of an unbound stomach , ever rank 
 himself with princ ; one that , by suggest , 
 tie all the kingdom . simoni wa fair play ; 
 hi own opinion wa hi law . i ' th ' presenc 
 he would say untruth , and be ever doubl 
 both in hi word and mean . he wa never , 
 but where he meant to ruin , piti . 
 hi promis were , as he then wa , mighti ; 
 but hi perform , as he is now , noth . 
 of hi own bodi he wa ill , and gave 
 the clergi ill exampl . 
 griffith . nobl madam , 
 men 's evil manner live in brass : their virtu 
 we write in water . may it pleas your high 
 to hear me speak hi good now ? 
 katharin . ye , good griffith ; 
 i were malici els . 
 griffith . thi cardin , 
 though from an humbl stock , undoubtedli 
 wa fashion 'd to much honour from hi cradl . 
 he wa a scholar , and a ripe and good one ; 
 exceed wise , fair-spoken , and persuad ; 
 lofti and sour to them that lov 'd him not , 
 but to those men that sought him sweet as summer . 
 and though he were unsatisfi in getting- 
 which wa a sin-yet in bestow , madam , 
 he wa most princ : ever wit for him 
 those twin of learn that he rai 'd in you , 
 ipswich and oxford ! one of which fell with him , 
 unwil to outliv the good that did it ; 
 the other , though unfinish 'd , yet so famou , 
 so excel in art , and still so rise , 
 that christendom shall ever speak hi virtu . 
 hi overthrow heap 'd happi upon him ; 
 for then , and not till then , he felt himself , 
 and found the blessed of be littl . 
 and , to add greater honour to hi age 
 than man could give him , he die fear god . 
 katharin . after my death i wish no other herald , 
 no other speaker of my live action , 
 to keep mine honour from corrupt , 
 but such an honest chronicl as griffith . 
 whom i most hate live , thou hast made me , 
 with thi religi truth and modesti , 
 now in hi ash honour . peac be with him ! 
 patienc , be near me still , and set me lower : 
 i have not long to troubl thee . good griffith , 
 caus the musician play me that sad note 
 i nam 'd my knell , whilst i sit medit 
 on that celesti harmoni i go to . 
 [ sad and solemn music ] 
 griffith . she is asleep . good wench , let 's sit down quiet , 
 for fear we wake her . softli , gentl patienc . 
 
 the vision . 
 
 enter , solemnli trip one after anoth , six 
 personag clad in white robe , wear on their 
 head garland of bay , and golden vizard on their 
 face ; branch of bay or palm in their hand . they 
 first conge unto her , then danc ; and , at certain 
 chang , the first two hold a spare garland over her 
 head , at which the other four make rever curtsi . 
 then the two that held the garland deliv the 
 same to the other next two , who observ the same 
 order in their chang , and hold the garland over 
 her head ; which done , they deliv the same garland 
 to the last two , who likewis observ the same order ; 
 at which , as it were by inspir , she make 
 in her sleep sign of rejoic , and holdeth up her 
 hand to heaven . and so in their danc vanish , 
 carri the garland with them . the music continu 
 
 katharin . spirit of peac , where are ye ? are ye all gone ? 
 and leav me here in wretched behind ye ? 
 griffith . madam , we are here . 
 katharin . it is not you i call for . 
 saw ye none enter sinc i slept ? 
 griffith . none , madam . 
 katharin . no ? saw you not , even now , a bless troop 
 invit me to a banquet ; whose bright face 
 cast thousand beam upon me , like the sun ? 
 they promi 'd me etern happi , 
 and brought me garland , griffith , which i feel 
 i am not worthi yet to wear . i shall , assuredli . 
 griffith . i am most joy , madam , such good dream 
 possess your fanci . 
 katharin . bid the music leav , 
 they are harsh and heavi to me . [ music ceas ] 
 patienc . do you note 
 how much her grace is alter 'd on the sudden ? 
 how long her face is drawn ! how pale she look , 
 and of an earthli cold ! mark her eye . 
 griffith . she is go , wench . pray , pray . 
 patienc . heaven comfort her ! 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . a n't like your grace- 
 katharin . you are a sauci fellow . 
 deserv we no more rever ? 
 griffith . you are to blame , 
 know she will not lose her wont great , 
 to use so rude behaviour . go to , kneel . 
 messeng . i humbl do entreat your high ' pardon ; 
 my hast made me unmannerli . there is stay 
 a gentleman , sent from the king , to see you . 
 katharin . admit him entranc , griffith ; but thi fellow 
 let me ne'er see again . exit messeng 
 
 enter lord capuciu 
 
 if my sight fail not , 
 you should be lord ambassador from the emperor , 
 my royal nephew , and your name capuciu . 
 capuciu . madam , the same-your servant . 
 katharin . o , my lord , 
 the time and titl now are alter 'd strang 
 with me sinc first you knew me . but , i pray you , 
 what is your pleasur with me ? 
 capuciu . nobl ladi , 
 first , mine own servic to your grace ; the next , 
 the king 's request that i would visit you , 
 who griev much for your weak , and by me 
 send you hi princ commend 
 and heartili entreat you take good comfort . 
 katharin . o my good lord , that comfort come too late , 
 't is like a pardon after execut : 
 that gentl physic , given in time , had cur 'd me ; 
 but now i am past all comfort here , but prayer . 
 how doe hi high ? 
 capuciu . madam , in good health . 
 katharin . so may he ever do ! and ever flourish 
 when i shall dwell with worm , and my poor name 
 banish 'd the kingdom ! patienc , is that letter 
 i cau 'd you write yet sent away ? 
 patienc . no , madam . [ give it to katharin ] 
 katharin . sir , i most humbl pray you to deliv 
 thi to my lord the king . 
 capuciu . most will , madam . 
 katharin . in which i have commend to hi good 
 the model of our chast love , hi young daughter- 
 the dew of heaven fall thick in bless on her ! - 
 beseech him to give her virtuou breeding- 
 she is young , and of a nobl modest natur ; 
 i hope she will deserv well-and a littl 
 to love her for her mother 's sake , that lov 'd him , 
 heaven know how dearli . my next poor petit 
 is that hi nobl grace would have some piti 
 upon my wretch women that so long 
 have follow 'd both my fortun faith ; 
 of which there is not one , i dare avow- 
 and now i should not lie-but will deserv , 
 for virtu and true beauti of the soul , 
 for honesti and decent carriag , 
 a right good husband , let him be a nobl ; 
 and sure those men are happi that shall have 'em . 
 the last is for my men-they are the poorest , 
 but poverti could never draw 'em from me- 
 that they may have their wage duli paid 'em , 
 and someth over to rememb me by . 
 if heaven had plea 'd to have given me longer life 
 and abl mean , we had not part thu . 
 these are the whole content ; and , good my lord , 
 by that you love the dearest in thi world , 
 as you wish christian peac to soul depart , 
 stand these poor peopl 's friend , and urg the king 
 to do me thi last right . 
 capuciu . by heaven , i will , 
 or let me lose the fashion of a man ! 
 katharin . i thank you , honest lord . rememb me 
 in all humil unto hi high ; 
 say hi long troubl now is pass 
 out of thi world . tell him in death i bless 'd him , 
 for so i will . mine eye grow dim . farewel , 
 my lord . griffith , farewel . nay , patienc , 
 you must not leav me yet . i must to bed ; 
 call in more women . when i am dead , good wench , 
 let me be us 'd with honour ; strew me over 
 with maiden flower , that all the world may know 
 i wa a chast wife to my grave . embalm me , 
 then lay me forth ; although unqueen 'd , yet like 
 a queen , and daughter to a king , inter me . 
 i can no more . exeunt , lead katharin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 london . a galleri in the palac 
 
 enter gardin , bishop of winchest , a page with a torch befor him , 
 met by sir thoma lovel 
 
 gardin . it 's one o'clock , boy , is't not ? 
 boy . it hath struck . 
 gardin . these should be hour for necess , 
 not for delight ; time to repair our natur 
 with comfort repos , and not for us 
 to wast these time . good hour of night , sir thoma ! 
 whither so late ? 
 lovel . came you from the king , my lord ? 
 gardin . i did , sir thoma , and left him at primero 
 with the duke of suffolk . 
 lovel . i must to him too , 
 befor he go to bed . i 'll take my leav . 
 gardin . not yet , sir thoma lovel . what 's the matter ? 
 it seem you are in hast . an if there be 
 no great offenc belong to't , give your friend 
 some touch of your late busi . affair that walk- 
 as they say spirit do-at midnight , have 
 in them a wilder natur than the busi 
 that seek despatch by day . 
 lovel . my lord , i love you ; 
 and durst commend a secret to your ear 
 much weightier than thi work . the queen 's in labour , 
 they say in great extrem , and fear 'd 
 she 'll with the labour end . 
 gardin . the fruit she goe with 
 i pray for heartili , that it may find 
 good time , and live ; but for the stock , sir thoma , 
 i wish it grubb 'd up now . 
 lovel . methink i could 
 cri thee amen ; and yet my conscienc say 
 she 's a good creatur , and , sweet ladi , doe 
 deserv our better wish . 
 gardin . but , sir , sir- 
 hear me , sir thoma . y'are a gentleman 
 of mine own way ; i know you wise , religi ; 
 and , let me tell you , it will ne'er be well- 
 'twill not , sir thoma lovel , take't of me- 
 till cranmer , cromwel , her two hand , and she , 
 sleep in their grave . 
 lovel . now , sir , you speak of two 
 the most remark 'd i ' th ' kingdom . as for cromwel , 
 besid that of the jewel hous , is made master 
 o ' th ' roll , and the king 's secretari ; further , sir , 
 stand in the gap and trade of moe prefer , 
 with which the time will load him . th ' archbishop 
 is the king 's hand and tongu , and who dare speak 
 one syllabl against him ? 
 gardin . ye , ye , sir thoma , 
 there are that dare ; and i myself have ventur 'd 
 to speak my mind of him ; and inde thi day , 
 sir-i may tell it you-i think i have 
 incen 'd the lord o ' th ' council , that he is- 
 for so i know he is , they know he is- 
 a most arch heret , a pestil 
 that doe infect the land ; with which they move 
 have broken with the king , who hath so far 
 given ear to our complaint-of hi great grace 
 and princ care , forese those fell mischief 
 our reason laid befor him-hath command 
 to-morrow morn to the council board 
 he be convent . he 's a rank weed , sir thoma , 
 and we must root him out . from your affair 
 i hinder you too long-good night , sir thoma . 
 lovel . mani good night , my lord ; i rest your servant . 
 exeunt gardin and page 
 
 enter the king and the duke of suffolk 
 
 king . charl , i will play no more to-night ; 
 my mind 's not o n't ; you are too hard for me . 
 suffolk . sir , i did never win of you befor . 
 king . but littl , charl ; 
 nor shall not , when my fanci 's on my play . 
 now , lovel , from the queen what is the news ? 
 lovel . i could not person deliv to her 
 what you command me , but by her woman 
 i sent your messag ; who return 'd her thank 
 in the great'st humbl , and desir 'd your high 
 most heartili to pray for her . 
 king . what say'st thou , ha ? 
 to pray for her ? what , is she cri out ? 
 lovel . so said her woman ; and that her suff'ranc made 
 almost each pang a death . 
 king . ala , good ladi ! 
 suffolk . god safe quit her of her burden , and 
 with gentl travail , to the glad of 
 your high with an heir ! 
 king . 't is midnight , charl ; 
 prithe to bed ; and in thi pray'r rememb 
 th ' estat of my poor queen . leav me alon , 
 for i must think of that which compani 
 will not be friendli to . 
 suffolk . i wish your high 
 a quiet night , and my good mistress will 
 rememb in my prayer . 
 king . charl , good night . exit suffolk 
 
 enter sir anthoni denni 
 
 well , sir , what follow ? 
 denni . sir , i have brought my lord the archbishop , 
 as you command me . 
 king . ha ! canterburi ? 
 denni . ay , my good lord . 
 king . 't is true . where is he , denni ? 
 denni . he attend your high ' pleasur . 
 king . bring him to us . exit denni 
 lovel . [ asid ] thi is about that which the bishop spake . 
 i am happili come hither . 
 
 re-ent denni , with cranmer 
 
 king . avoid the galleri . [ lovel seem to stay ] 
 ha ! i have said . be gone . 
 what ! exeunt lovel and denni 
 cranmer . [ asid ] i am fearful-wherefor frown he thu ? 
 't is hi aspect of terror . all 's not well . 
 king . how now , my lord ? you do desir to know 
 wherefor i sent for you . 
 cranmer . [ kneel ] it is my duti 
 t'attend your high ' pleasur . 
 king . pray you , aris , 
 my good and graciou lord of canterburi . 
 come , you and i must walk a turn togeth ; 
 i have news to tell you ; come , come , me your hand . 
 ah , my good lord , i griev at what i speak , 
 and am right sorri to repeat what follow . 
 i have , and most unwillingli , of late 
 heard mani grievous-i do say , my lord , 
 grievous-complaint of you ; which , be consid 'd , 
 have mov 'd us and our council that you shall 
 thi morn come befor us ; where i know 
 you can not with such freedom purg yourself 
 but that , till further trial in those charg 
 which will requir your answer , you must take 
 your patienc to you and be well content 
 to make your hous our tow ' r . you a brother of us , 
 it fit we thu proceed , or els no wit 
 would come against you . 
 cranmer . i humbl thank your high 
 and am right glad to catch thi good occas 
 most throughli to be winnow where my chaff 
 and corn shall fli asund ; for i know 
 there 's none stand under more calumni tongu 
 than i myself , poor man . 
 king . stand up , good canterburi ; 
 thi truth and thi integr is root 
 in us , thi friend . give me thi hand , stand up ; 
 prithe let 's walk . now , by my holidam , 
 what manner of man are you ? my lord , i look 'd 
 you would have given me your petit that 
 i should have ta'en some pain to bring togeth 
 yourself and your accus , and to have heard you 
 without indur further . 
 cranmer . most dread lieg , 
 the good i stand on is my truth and honesti ; 
 if they shall fail , i with mine enemi 
 will triumph o'er my person ; which i weigh not , 
 be of those virtu vacant . i fear noth 
 what can be said against me . 
 king . know you not 
 how your state stand i ' th ' world , with the whole world ? 
 your enemi are mani , and not small ; their practic 
 must bear the same proport ; and not ever 
 the justic and the truth o ' th ' question carri 
 the due o ' th ' verdict with it ; at what eas 
 might corrupt mind procur knave as corrupt 
 to swear against you ? such thing have been done . 
 you are potent oppo 'd , and with a malic 
 of as great size . ween you of better luck , 
 i mean in perjur 'd wit , than your master , 
 whose minist you are , while here he liv 'd 
 upon thi naughti earth ? go to , go to ; 
 you take a precipic for no leap of danger , 
 and woo your own destruct . 
 cranmer . god and your majesti 
 protect mine innoc , or i fall into 
 the trap is laid for me ! 
 king . be of good cheer ; 
 they shall no more prevail than we give way to . 
 keep comfort to you , and thi morn see 
 you do appear befor them ; if they shall chanc , 
 in charg you with matter , to commit you , 
 the best persuas to the contrari 
 fail not to use , and with what vehem 
 th ' occas shall instruct you . if entreati 
 will render you no remedi , thi ring 
 deliv them , and your appeal to us 
 there make befor them . look , the good man weep ! 
 he 's honest , on mine honour . god 's blest mother ! 
 i swear he is true-heart , and a soul 
 none better in my kingdom . get you gone , 
 and do as i have bid you . 
 exit cranmer 
 he ha strangl hi languag in hi tear . 
 
 enter old ladi 
 
 gentleman . [ within ] come back ; what mean you ? 
 old ladi . i 'll not come back ; the tide that i bring 
 will make my bold manner . now , good angel 
 fli o'er thi royal head , and shade thi person 
 under their bless wing ! 
 king . now , by thi look 
 i guess thi messag . is the queen deliv 'd ? 
 say ay , and of a boy . 
 old ladi . ay , ay , my lieg ; 
 and of a love boy . the god of heaven 
 both now and ever bless her ! 't is a girl , 
 promis boy hereaft . sir , your queen 
 desir your visit , and to be 
 acquaint with thi stranger ; 't is as like you 
 as cherri is to cherri . 
 king . lovel ! 
 
 enter lovel 
 
 lovel . sir ? 
 king . give her an hundr mark . i 'll to the queen . exit 
 old ladi . an hundr mark ? by thi light , i 'll ha ' more ! 
 an ordinari groom is for such payment . 
 i will have more , or scold it out of him . 
 said i for thi the girl wa like to him ! i 'll 
 have more , or els unsay't ; and now , while 't is hot , 
 i 'll put it to the issu . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 lobbi befor the council chamber 
 
 enter cranmer , archbishop of canterburi 
 
 cranmer . i hope i am not too late ; and yet the gentleman 
 that wa sent to me from the council pray 'd me 
 to make great hast . all fast ? what mean thi ? ho ! 
 who wait there ? sure you know me ? 
 
 enter keeper 
 
 keeper . ye , my lord ; 
 but yet i can not help you . 
 cranmer . whi ? 
 keeper . your grace must wait till you be call 'd for . 
 
 enter doctor butt 
 
 cranmer . so . 
 butt . [ asid ] thi is a piec of malic . i am glad 
 i came thi way so happili ; the king 
 shall understand it present . exit 
 cranmer . [ asid ] 't is butt , 
 the king 's physician ; as he pass 'd along , 
 how earnestli he cast hi eye upon me ! 
 pray heaven he sound not my disgrac ! for certain , 
 thi is of purpos laid by some that hate me- 
 god turn their heart ! i never sought their malice- 
 to quench mine honour ; they would shame to make me 
 wait els at door , a fellow councillor , 
 'mong boy , groom , and lackey . but their pleasur 
 must be fulfil 'd , and i attend with patienc . 
 
 enter the king and butt at window abov 
 
 butt . i 'll show your grace the strangest sight- 
 king . what 's that , butt ? 
 butt . i think your high saw thi mani a day . 
 king . bodi a me , where is it ? 
 butt . there my lord : 
 the high promot of hi grace of canterburi ; 
 who hold hi state at door , 'mongst pursuiv , 
 page , and footboy . 
 king . ha , 't is he inde . 
 is thi the honour they do one anoth ? 
 't is well there 's one abov 'em yet . i had thought 
 they had part so much honesti among 'em- 
 at least good manners-a not thu to suffer 
 a man of hi place , and so near our favour , 
 to danc attend on their lordship ' pleasur , 
 and at the door too , like a post with packet . 
 by holi mari , butt , there 's knaveri ! 
 let 'em alon , and draw the curtain close ; 
 we shall hear more anon . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 the council chamber 
 
 a council tabl brought in , with chair and stool , and place 
 under the state . enter lord chancellor , place himself at the upper end 
 of the tabl on the left band , a seat be left void abov him , 
 as for canterburi 's seat . duke of suffolk , duke of norfolk , surrey , 
 lord chamberlain , gardin , seat themselv in order on each side ; 
 cromwel at lower end , as secretari . keeper at the door 
 
 chancellor . speak to the busi , master secretari ; 
 whi are we met in council ? 
 cromwel . pleas your honour , 
 the chief caus concern hi grace of canterburi . 
 gardin . ha he had knowledg of it ? 
 cromwel . ye . 
 norfolk . who wait there ? 
 keeper . without , my nobl lord ? 
 gardin . ye . 
 keeper . my lord archbishop ; 
 and ha done half an hour , to know your pleasur . 
 chancellor . let him come in . 
 keeper . your grace may enter now . 
 
 cranmer approach the council tabl 
 
 chancellor . my good lord archbishop , i am veri sorri 
 to sit here at thi present , and behold 
 that chair stand empti ; but we all are men , 
 in our own natur frail and capabl 
 of our flesh ; few are angel ; out of which frailti 
 and want of wisdom , you , that best should teach us , 
 have misdemean 'd yourself , and not a littl , 
 toward the king first , then hi law , in fill 
 the whole realm by your teach and your chaplains- 
 for so we are inform'd-with new opinion , 
 diver and danger ; which are heresi , 
 and , not reform 'd , may prove pernici . 
 gardin . which reform must be sudden too , 
 my nobl lord ; for those that tame wild hors 
 pace 'em not in their hand to make 'em gentl , 
 but stop their mouth with stubborn bit and spur 'em 
 till they obey the manag . if we suffer , 
 out of our easi and childish piti 
 to one man 's honour , thi contagi sick , 
 farewel all physic ; and what follow then ? 
 commot , uproar , with a gener taint 
 of the whole state ; as of late day our neighbour , 
 the upper germani , can dearli wit , 
 yet freshli piti in our memori . 
 cranmer . my good lord , hitherto in all the progress 
 both of my life and offic , i have labour 'd , 
 and with no littl studi , that my teach 
 and the strong cours of my author 
 might go one way , and safe ; and the end 
 wa ever to do well . nor is there living- 
 i speak it with a singl heart , my lords- 
 a man that more detest , more stir against , 
 both in hi privat conscienc and hi place , 
 defac of a public peac than i do . 
 pray heaven the king may never find a heart 
 with less allegi in it ! men that make 
 envi and crook malic nourish 
 dare bite the best . i do beseech your lordship 
 that , in thi case of justic , my accus , 
 be what they will , may stand forth face to face 
 and freeli urg against me . 
 suffolk . nay , my lord , 
 that can not be ; you are a councillor , 
 and by that virtu no man dare accus you . 
 gardin . my lord , becaus we have busi of more moment , 
 we will be short with you . 't is hi high ' pleasur 
 and our consent , for better trial of you , 
 from henc you be commit to the tower ; 
 where , be but a privat man again , 
 you shall know mani dare accus you boldli , 
 more than , i fear , you are provid for . 
 cranmer . ah , my good lord of winchest , i thank you ; 
 you are alway my good friend ; if your will pass , 
 i shall both find your lordship judg and juror , 
 you are so merci . i see your end- 
 't is my undo . love and meek , lord , 
 becom a churchman better than ambit ; 
 win stray soul with modesti again , 
 cast none away . that i shall clear myself , 
 lay all the weight ye can upon my patienc , 
 i make as littl doubt as you do conscienc 
 in do daili wrong . i could say more , 
 but rever to your call make me modest . 
 gardin . my lord , my lord , you are a sectari ; 
 that 's the plain truth . your paint gloss discov , 
 to men that understand you , word and weak . 
 cromwel . my lord of winchest , y'are a littl , 
 by your good favour , too sharp ; men so nobl , 
 howev faulti , yet should find respect 
 for what they have been ; 't is a cruelti 
 to load a fall man . 
 gardin . good master secretari , 
 i cri your honour merci ; you may , worst 
 of all thi tabl , say so . 
 cromwel . whi , my lord ? 
 gardin . do not i know you for a favour 
 of thi new sect ? ye are not sound . 
 cromwel . not sound ? 
 gardin . not sound , i say . 
 cromwel . would you were half so honest ! 
 men 's prayer then would seek you , not their fear . 
 gardin . i shall rememb thi bold languag . 
 cromwel . do . 
 rememb your bold life too . 
 chancellor . thi is too much ; 
 forbear , for shame , my lord . 
 gardin . i have done . 
 cromwel . and i . 
 chancellor . then thu for you , my lord : it stand agre , 
 i take it , by all voic , that forthwith 
 you be convey 'd to th ' tower a prison ; 
 there to remain till the king 's further pleasur 
 be known unto us . are you all agre , lord ? 
 all . we are . 
 cranmer . is there no other way of merci , 
 but i must need to th ' tower , my lord ? 
 gardin . what other 
 would you expect ? you are strang troublesom . 
 let some o ' th ' guard be readi there . 
 
 enter the guard 
 
 cranmer . for me ? 
 must i go like a traitor thither ? 
 gardin . receiv him , 
 and see him safe i ' th ' tower . 
 cranmer . stay , good my lord , 
 i have a littl yet to say . look there , my lord ; 
 by virtu of that ring i take my caus 
 out of the gripe of cruel men and give it 
 to a most nobl judg , the king my master . 
 chamberlain . thi is the king 's ring . 
 surrey . 't is no counterfeit . 
 suffolk . 't is the right ring , by heav'n . i told ye all , 
 when we first put thi danger stone a-rol , 
 'twould fall upon ourselv . 
 norfolk . do you think , my lord , 
 the king will suffer but the littl finger 
 of thi man to be vex 'd ? 
 chamberlain . 't is now too certain ; 
 how much more is hi life in valu with him ! 
 would i were fairli out o n't ! 
 cromwel . my mind gave me , 
 in seek tale and inform 
 against thi man-whos honesti the devil 
 and hi discipl onli envi at- 
 ye blew the fire that burn ye . now have at ye ! 
 
 enter the king frown on them ; he take hi seat 
 
 gardin . dread sovereign , how much are we bound to heaven 
 in daili thank , that gave us such a princ ; 
 not onli good and wise but most religi ; 
 one that in all obedi make the church 
 the chief aim of hi honour and , to strengthen 
 that holi duti , out of dear respect , 
 hi royal self in judgment come to hear 
 the caus betwixt her and thi great offend . 
 king . you were ever good at sudden commend , 
 bishop of winchest . but know i come not 
 to hear such flatteri now , and in my presenc 
 they are too thin and bare to hide offenc . 
 to me you can not reach you play the spaniel , 
 and think with wag of your tongu to win me ; 
 but whatsoe' thou tak'st me for , i 'm sure 
 thou hast a cruel natur and a bloodi . 
 [ to cranmer ] good man , sit down . now let me see the proudest 
 he that dare most but wag hi finger at thee . 
 by all that 's holi , he had better starv 
 than but onc think thi place becom thee not . 
 surrey . may it pleas your grace- 
 king . no , sir , it doe not pleas me . 
 i had thought i had had men of some understand 
 and wisdom of my council ; but i find none . 
 wa it discret , lord , to let thi man , 
 thi good man-few of you deserv that title- 
 thi honest man , wait like a lousi footboy 
 at chamber door ? and one as great as you are ? 
 whi , what a shame wa thi ! did my commiss 
 bid ye so far forget yourselv ? i gave ye 
 power as he wa a councillor to tri him , 
 not as a groom . there 's some of ye , i see , 
 more out of malic than integr , 
 would tri him to the utmost , had ye mean ; 
 which ye shall never have while i live . 
 chancellor . thu far , 
 my most dread sovereign , may it like your grace 
 to let my tongu excus all . what wa purpo 'd 
 concern hi imprison wa rather- 
 if there be faith in men-meant for hi trial 
 and fair purgat to the world , than malic , 
 i 'm sure , in me . 
 king . well , well , my lord , respect him ; 
 take him , and use him well , he 's worthi of it . 
 i will say thu much for him : if a princ 
 may be behold to a subject , 
 am for hi love and servic so to him . 
 make me no more ado , but all embrac him ; 
 be friend , for shame , my lord ! my lord of canterburi , 
 i have a suit which you must not deni me : 
 that is , a fair young maid that yet want baptism ; 
 you must be godfath , and answer for her . 
 cranmer . the greatest monarch now aliv may glori 
 in such an honour ; how may i deserv it , 
 that am a poor and humbl subject to you ? 
 king . come , come , my lord , you 'd spare your spoon . you 
 shall have 
 two nobl partner with you : the old duchess of norfolk 
 and ladi marqui dorset . will these pleas you ? 
 onc more , my lord of winchest , i charg you , 
 embrac and love thi man . 
 gardin . with a true heart 
 and brother-lov i do it . 
 cranmer . and let heaven 
 wit how dear i hold thi confirm . 
 king . good man , those joy tear show thi true heart . 
 the common voic , i see , is verifi 
 of thee , which say thu : 'do my lord of canterburi 
 a shrewd turn and he 's your friend for ever . ' 
 come , lord , we trifl time away ; i long 
 to have thi young one made a christian . 
 as i have made ye one , lord , one remain ; 
 so i grow stronger , you more honour gain . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 the palac yard 
 
 nois and tumult within . enter porter and hi man 
 
 porter . you 'll leav your nois anon , ye rascal . do you 
 take the court for pari garden ? ye rude slave , leav your 
 gape . 
 [ within : good master porter , i belong to th ' larder . ] 
 porter . belong to th ' gallow , and be hang 'd , ye rogu ! is 
 thi a place to roar in ? fetch me a dozen crab-tre stave , 
 and strong one ; these are but switch to 'em . i 'll scratch 
 your head . you must be see christen ? do you look 
 for ale and cake here , you rude rascal ? 
 man . pray , sir , be patient ; 't is as much imposs , 
 unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannon , 
 to scatter 'em as 't is to make 'em sleep 
 on may-day morn ; which will never be . 
 we may as well push against paul 's as stir 'em . 
 porter . how got they in , and be hang 'd ? 
 man . ala , i know not : how get the tide in ? 
 as much as one sound cudgel of four foot- 
 you see the poor remainder-could distribut , 
 i made no spare , sir . 
 porter . you did noth , sir . 
 man . i am not samson , nor sir guy , nor colbrand , 
 to mow 'em down befor me ; but if i spar 'd ani 
 that had a head to hit , either young or old , 
 he or she , cuckold or cuckold-mak , 
 let me ne'er hope to see a chine again ; 
 and that i would not for a cow , god save her ! 
 [ within : do you hear , master porter ? ] 
 porter . i shall be with you present , good master puppi . 
 keep the door close , sirrah . 
 man . what would you have me do ? 
 porter . what should you do , but knock 'em down by th ' 
 dozen ? is thi moorfield to muster in ? or have we some 
 strang indian with the great tool come to court , the 
 women so besieg us ? bless me , what a fri of fornic 
 is at door ! on my christian conscienc , thi one christen 
 will beget a thousand : here will be father , godfath , 
 and all togeth . 
 man . the spoon will be the bigger , sir . there is a fellow 
 somewhat near the door , he should be a brazier by hi 
 face , for , o ' my conscienc , twenti of the dog-day now 
 reign in 's nose ; all that stand about him are under the line , 
 they need no other penanc . that fire-drak did i hit three 
 time on the head , and three time wa hi nose discharg 
 against me ; he stand there like a mortar-piec , to blow us . 
 there wa a haberdash 's wife of small wit near him , that 
 rail 'd upon me till her pink 'd porring fell off her head , 
 for kindl such a combust in the state . i miss 'd the 
 meteor onc , and hit that woman , who cri out 'club ! ' 
 when i might see from far some forti truncheon draw 
 to her succour , which were the hope o ' th ' strand , where 
 she wa quarter . they fell on ; i made good my place . 
 at length they came to th ' broomstaff to me ; i defi 'em 
 still ; when suddenli a file of boy behind 'em , loos shot , 
 deliv 'd such a show ' r of pebbl that i wa fain to draw 
 mine honour in and let 'em win the work : the devil wa 
 amongst 'em , i think sure . 
 porter . these are the youth that thunder at a playhous 
 and fight for bitten appl ; that no audienc but the tribul 
 of tower-hil or the limb of limehous , their dear 
 brother , are abl to endur . i have some of 'em in limbo 
 patrum , and there they are like to danc these three day ; 
 besid the run banquet of two beadl that is to come . 
 
 enter the lord chamberlain 
 
 chamberlain . merci o ' me , what a multitud are here ! 
 they grow still too ; from all part they are come , 
 as if we kept a fair here ! where are these porter , 
 these lazi knave ? y'have made a fine hand , fellow . 
 there 's a trim rabbl let in : are all these 
 your faith friend o ' th ' suburb ? we shall have 
 great store of room , no doubt , left for the ladi , 
 when they pass back from the christen . 
 porter . a n't pleas your honour , 
 we are but men ; and what so mani may do , 
 not be torn a piec , we have done . 
 an armi can not rule 'em . 
 chamberlain . as i live , 
 if the king blame me for't , i 'll lay ye an 
 by th ' heel , and suddenli ; and on your head 
 clap round fine for neglect . y'are lazi knave ; 
 and here ye lie bait of bombard , when 
 ye should do servic . hark ! the trumpet sound ; 
 th ' are come alreadi from the christen . 
 go break among the press and find a way out 
 to let the troop pass fairli , or i 'll find 
 a marshalsea shall hold ye play these two month . 
 porter . make way there for the princess . 
 man . you great fellow , 
 stand close up , or i 'll make your head ach . 
 porter . you i ' th ' camlet , get up o ' th ' rail ; 
 i 'll peck you o'er the pale els . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 the palac 
 
 enter trumpet , sound ; then two aldermen , lord mayor , garter , cranmer , 
 duke of norfolk , with hi marshal 's staff , duke of suffolk , 
 two noblemen bear great standing-bowl for the christen gift ; 
 then four noblemen bear a canopi , under which the duchess of norfolk , 
 godmoth , bear the child richli habit in a mantl , etc. , 
 train born by a ladi ; then follow the marchio dorset , 
 the other godmoth , and ladi . the troop pass onc about the stage , 
 and garter speak 
 
 garter . heaven , from thi endless good , send prosper 
 life , long and ever-happi , to the high and mighti 
 princess of england , elizabeth ! 
 
 flourish . enter king and guard 
 
 cranmer . [ kneel ] and to your royal grace and the 
 good queen ! 
 my nobl partner and myself thu pray : 
 all comfort , joy , in thi most graciou ladi , 
 heaven ever laid up to make parent happi , 
 may hourli fall upon ye ! 
 king . thank you , good lord archbishop . 
 what is her name ? 
 cranmer . elizabeth . 
 king . stand up , lord . [ the king kiss the child ] 
 with thi kiss take my bless : god protect thee ! 
 into whose hand i give thi life . 
 cranmer . amen . 
 king . my nobl gossip , y'have been too prodig ; 
 i thank ye heartili . so shall thi ladi , 
 when she ha so much english . 
 cranmer . let me speak , sir , 
 for heaven now bid me ; and the word i utter 
 let none think flatteri , for they 'll find 'em truth . 
 thi royal infant-heaven still move about her ! - 
 though in her cradl , yet now promis 
 upon thi land a thousand bless , 
 which time shall bring to ripe . she shall be- 
 but few now live can behold that goodness- 
 a pattern to all princ live with her , 
 and all that shall succeed . saba wa never 
 more covet of wisdom and fair virtu 
 than thi pure soul shall be . all princ grace 
 that mould up such a mighti piec as thi is , 
 with all the virtu that attend the good , 
 shall still be doubl on her . truth shall nurs her , 
 holi and heavenli thought still counsel her ; 
 she shall be lov 'd and fear 'd . her own shall bless her : 
 her foe shake like a field of beaten corn , 
 and hang their head with sorrow . good grow with her ; 
 in her day everi man shall eat in safeti 
 under hi own vine what he plant , and sing 
 the merri song of peac to all hi neighbour . 
 god shall be truli known ; and those about her 
 from her shall read the perfect way of honour , 
 and by those claim their great , not by blood . 
 nor shall thi peac sleep with her ; but as when 
 the bird of wonder die , the maiden phoenix 
 her ash new creat anoth heir 
 as great in admir as herself , 
 so shall she leav her blessed to one- 
 when heaven shall call her from thi cloud of darkness- 
 who from the sacr ash of her honour 
 shall star-lik rise , as great in fame as she wa , 
 and so stand fix 'd . peac , plenti , love , truth , terror , 
 that were the servant to thi chosen infant , 
 shall then be hi , and like a vine grow to him ; 
 wherev the bright sun of heaven shall shine , 
 hi honour and the great of hi name 
 shall be , and make new nation ; he shall flourish , 
 and like a mountain cedar reach hi branch 
 to all the plain about him ; our children 's children 
 shall see thi and bless heaven . 
 king . thou speakest wonder . 
 cranmer . she shall be , to the happi of england , 
 an age princess ; mani day shall see her , 
 and yet no day without a deed to crown it . 
 would i had known no more ! but she must die- 
 she must , the saint must have her-yet a virgin ; 
 a most unspot lili shall she pass 
 to th ' ground , and all the world shall mourn her . 
 king . o lord archbishop , 
 thou hast made me now a man ; never befor 
 thi happi child did i get anyth . 
 thi oracl of comfort ha so plea 'd me 
 that when i am in heaven i shall desir 
 to see what thi child doe , and prais my maker . 
 i thank ye all . to you , my good lord mayor , 
 and you , good brethren , i am much behold ; 
 i have receiv 'd much honour by your presenc , 
 and ye shall find me thank . lead the way , lord ; 
 ye must all see the queen , and she must thank ye , 
 she will be sick els . thi day , no man think 
 ha busi at hi hous ; for all shall stay . 
 thi littl one shall make it holiday . exeunt 
 
 king_henry_viii|epilogu 
 the epilogu . 
 
 't is ten to one thi play can never pleas 
 all that are here . some come to take their eas 
 and sleep an act or two ; but those , we fear , 
 w'have fright with our trumpet ; so , 't is clear , 
 they 'll say 't is nought ; other to hear the citi 
 abu 'd extrem , and to cri 'that 's witti ! ' 
 which we have not done neither ; that , i fear , 
 all the expect good w'are like to hear 
 for thi play at thi time is onli in 
 the merci construct of good women ; 
 for such a one we show 'd 'em . if they smile 
 and say 'twill do , i know within a while 
 all the best men are our ; for 't is ill hap 
 if they hold when their ladi bid 'em clap . 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 king john 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 juliu caesar , roman statesman and gener 
 octaviu , triumvir after caesar 's death , later augustu caesar , 
 first emperor of rome 
 mark antoni , gener and friend of caesar , a triumvir after hi death 
 lepidu , third member of the triumvir 
 marcu brutu , leader of the conspiraci against caesar 
 cassiu , instig of the conspiraci 
 casca , conspir against caesar 
 treboniu , `` `` `` 
 caiu ligariu , `` `` `` 
 deciu brutu , `` `` `` 
 metellu cimber , `` `` `` 
 cinna , `` `` `` 
 calpurnia , wife of caesar 
 portia , wife of brutu 
 cicero , senat 
 popiliu , `` 
 popiliu lena , `` 
 flaviu , tribun 
 marullu , tribun 
 cato , supportor of brutu 
 luciliu , `` `` `` 
 titiniu , `` `` `` 
 messala , `` `` `` 
 volumniu , `` `` `` 
 artemidoru , a teacher of rhetor 
 cinna , a poet 
 varro , servant to brutu 
 clitu , `` `` `` 
 claudio , `` `` `` 
 strato , `` `` `` 
 luciu , `` `` `` 
 dardaniu , `` `` `` 
 pindaru , servant to cassiu 
 the ghost of caesar 
 a soothsay 
 a poet 
 senat , citizen , soldier , common , messeng , and servant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : rome , the conspir ' camp near sardi , and the plain of philippi . 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 rome . a street . 
 
 enter flaviu , marullu , and certain common . 
 
 flaviu . henc , home , you idl creatur , get you home . 
 is thi a holiday ? what , know you not , 
 be mechan , you ought not walk 
 upon a labor day without the sign 
 of your profess ? speak , what trade art thou ? 
 first common . whi , sir , a carpent . 
 marullu . where is thi leather apron and thi rule ? 
 what dost thou with thi best apparel on ? 
 you , sir , what trade are you ? 
 second common . truli , sir , in respect of a fine workman , i am 
 but , as you would say , a cobbler . 
 marullu . but what trade art thou ? answer me directli . 
 second common . a trade , sir , that , i hope , i may use with a safe 
 conscienc , which is inde , sir , a mender of bad sole . 
 marullu . what trade , thou knave ? thou naughti knave , what trade ? 
 second common . nay , i beseech you , sir , be not out with me ; yet , 
 if you be out , sir , i can mend you . 
 marullu . what mean'st thou by that ? mend me , thou sauci fellow ! 
 second common . whi , sir , cobbl you . 
 flaviu . thou art a cobbler , art thou ? 
 second common . truli , sir , all that i live by is with the awl ; i 
 meddl with no tradesman 's matter , nor women 's matter , but with 
 awl . i am inde , sir , a surgeon to old shoe ; when they are in 
 great danger , i recov them . as proper men as ever trod upon 
 neat 's leather have gone upon my handiwork . 
 flaviu . but wherefor art not in thi shop today ? 
 whi dost thou lead these men about the street ? 
 second common . truli , sir , to wear out their shoe to get myself 
 into more work . but inde , sir , we make holiday to see caesar 
 and to rejoic in hi triumph . 
 marullu . wherefor rejoic ? what conquest bring he home ? 
 what tributari follow him to rome 
 to grace in captiv bond hi chariot wheel ? 
 you block , you stone , you wors than senseless thing ! 
 o you hard heart , you cruel men of rome , 
 knew you not pompey ? mani a time and oft 
 have you climb 'd up to wall and battlement , 
 to tower and window , yea , to chimney top , 
 your infant in your arm , and there have sat 
 the livelong day with patient expect 
 to see great pompey pass the street of rome . 
 and when you saw hi chariot but appear , 
 have you not made an univers shout 
 that tiber trembl underneath her bank 
 to hear the replic of your sound 
 made in her concav shore ? 
 and do you now put on your best attir ? 
 and do you now cull out a holiday ? 
 and do you now strew flower in hi way 
 that come in triumph over pompey 's blood ? 
 be gone ! 
 run to your hous , fall upon your knee , 
 pray to the god to intermit the plagu 
 that need must light on thi ingratitud . 
 flaviu . go , go , good countrymen , and , for thi fault , 
 assembl all the poor men of your sort , 
 draw them to tiber bank , and weep your tear 
 into the channel , till the lowest stream 
 do kiss the most exalt shore of all . 
 exeunt all common . 
 see whether their basest metal be not move ; 
 they vanish tongue-ti in their guilti . 
 go you down that way toward the capitol ; 
 thi way will i. disrob the imag 
 if you do find them deck 'd with ceremoni . 
 marullu . may we do so ? 
 you know it is the feast of luperc . 
 flaviu . it is no matter ; let no imag 
 be hung with caesar 's trophi . i 'll about 
 and drive away the vulgar from the street ; 
 so do you too , where you perceiv them thick . 
 these grow feather pluck 'd from caesar 's wing 
 will make him fli an ordinari pitch , 
 who els would soar abov the view of men 
 and keep us all in servil fear . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a public place . 
 
 flourish . enter caesar ; antoni , for the cours ; calpurnia , portia , 
 deciu , cicero , brutu , cassiu , and casca ; a great crowd follow , 
 among them a soothsay . 
 
 caesar . calpurnia ! 
 casca . peac , ho ! caesar speak . 
 music ceas . 
 caesar . calpurnia ! 
 calpurnia . here , my lord . 
 caesar . stand you directli in antonio 's way , 
 when he doth run hi cours . antonio ! 
 antoni . caesar , my lord ? 
 caesar . forget not in your speed , antonio , 
 to touch calpurnia , for our elder say 
 the barren , touch in thi holi chase , 
 shake off their steril curs . 
 antoni . i shall rememb . 
 when caesar say `` do thi , '' it is perform 'd . 
 caesar . set on , and leav no ceremoni out . flourish . 
 soothsay . caesar ! 
 caesar . ha ! who call ? 
 casca . bid everi nois be still . peac yet again ! 
 caesar . who is it in the press that call on me ? 
 i hear a tongu , shriller than all the music , 
 cri `` caesar . '' speak , caesar is turn 'd to hear . 
 soothsay . bewar the ide of march . 
 caesar . what man is that ? 
 brutu . a soothsay you bewar the ide of march . 
 caesar . set him befor me let me see hi face . 
 cassiu . fellow , come from the throng ; look upon caesar . 
 caesar . what say'st thou to me now ? speak onc again . 
 soothsay . bewar the ide of march . 
 caesar . he is a dreamer ; let us leav him . pass . 
 sennet . exeunt all but brutu and cassiu . 
 cassiu . will you go see the order of the cours ? 
 brutu . not i . 
 cassiu . i pray you , do . 
 brutu . i am not gamesom ; i do lack some part 
 of that quick spirit that is in antoni . 
 let me not hinder , cassiu , your desir ; 
 i 'll leav you . 
 cassiu . brutu , i do observ you now of late ; 
 i have not from your eye that gentl 
 and show of love as i wa wont to have ; 
 you bear too stubborn and too strang a hand 
 over your friend that love you . 
 brutu . cassiu , 
 be not deceiv ; if i have veil 'd my look , 
 i turn the troubl of my counten 
 mere upon myself . vex i am 
 of late with passion of some differ , 
 concept onli proper to myself , 
 which give some soil perhap to my behavior ; 
 but let not therefor my good friend be grieved- 
 among which number , cassiu , be you one- 
 nor constru ani further my neglect 
 than that poor brutu with himself at war 
 forget the show of love to other men . 
 cassiu . then , brutu , i have much mistook your passion , 
 by mean whereof thi breast of mine hath buri 
 thought of great valu , worthi cogit . 
 tell me , good brutu , can you see your face ? 
 brutu . no , cassiu , for the eye see not itself 
 but by reflect , by some other thing . 
 cassiu . 't is just , 
 and it is veri much lament , brutu , 
 that you have no such mirror as will turn 
 your hidden worthi into your eye 
 that you might see your shadow . i have heard 
 where mani of the best respect in rome , 
 except immort caesar , speak of brutu 
 and groan underneath thi age 's yoke , 
 have wish 'd that nobl brutu had hi eye . 
 brutu . into what danger would you lead me , cassiu , 
 that you would have me seek into myself 
 for that which is not in me ? 
 cassiu . therefor , good brutu , be prepar to hear , 
 and sinc you know you can not see yourself 
 so well as by reflect , i your glass 
 will modestli discov to yourself 
 that of yourself which you yet know not of . 
 and be not jealou on me , gentl brutu ; 
 were i a common laugher , or did use 
 to stale with ordinari oath my love 
 to everi new protest , if you know 
 that i do fawn on men and hug them hard 
 and after scandal them , or if you know 
 that i profess myself in banquet 
 to all the rout , then hold me danger . 
 flourish and shout . 
 brutu . what mean thi shout ? i do fear the peopl 
 choos caesar for their king . 
 cassiu . ay , do you fear it ? 
 then must i think you would not have it so . 
 brutu . i would not , cassiu , yet i love him well . 
 but wherefor do you hold me here so long ? 
 what is it that you would impart to me ? 
 if it be aught toward the gener good , 
 set honor in one eye and death i ' the other 
 and i will look on both indiffer . 
 for let the god so speed me as i love 
 the name of honor more than i fear death . 
 cassiu . i know that virtu to be in you , brutu , 
 as well as i do know your outward favor . 
 well , honor is the subject of my stori . 
 i can not tell what you and other men 
 think of thi life , but , for my singl self , 
 i had as lief not be as live to be 
 in awe of such a thing as i myself . 
 i wa born free as caesar , so were you ; 
 we both have fed as well , and we can both 
 endur the winter 's cold as well as he . 
 for onc , upon a raw and gusti day , 
 the troubl tiber chafe with her shore , 
 caesar said to me , `` darest thou , cassiu , now 
 leap in with me into thi angri flood 
 and swim to yonder point ? '' upon the word , 
 accoutr as i wa , i plung in 
 and bade him follow . so inde he did . 
 the torrent roar 'd , and we did buffet it 
 with lusti sinew , throw it asid 
 and stem it with heart of controversi . 
 but ere we could arriv the point propos , 
 caesar cri , `` help me , cassiu , or i sink ! 
 i , as aenea our great ancestor 
 did from the flame of troy upon hi shoulder 
 the old anchis bear , so from the wave of tiber 
 did i the tire caesar . and thi man 
 is now becom a god , and cassiu is 
 a wretch creatur and must bend hi bodi 
 if caesar carelessli but nod on him . 
 he had a fever when he wa in spain , 
 and when the fit wa on him i did mark 
 how he did shake . 't is true , thi god did shake ; 
 hi coward lip did from their color fli , 
 and that same eye whose bend doth awe the world 
 did lose hi luster . i did hear him groan . 
 ay , and that tongu of hi that bade the roman 
 mark him and write hi speech in their book , 
 ala , it cri , `` give me some drink , titiniu , '' 
 as a sick girl . ye god ! it doth amaz me 
 a man of such a feebl temper should 
 so get the start of the majest world 
 and bear the palm alon . shout . flourish . 
 brutu . anoth gener shout ! 
 i do believ that these applaus are 
 for some new honor that are heap 'd on caesar . 
 cassiu . whi , man , he doth bestrid the narrow world 
 like a colossu , and we petti men 
 walk under hi huge leg and peep about 
 to find ourselv dishonor grave . 
 men at some time are master of their fate : 
 the fault , dear brutu , is not in our star , 
 but in ourselv that we are underl . 
 brutu and caesar : what should be in that `` caesar '' ? 
 whi should that name be sound more than your ? 
 write them togeth , your is as fair a name ; 
 sound them , it doth becom the mouth as well ; 
 weigh them , it is as heavi ; conjur with 'em , 
 `` brutu '' will start a spirit as soon as `` caesar . '' 
 now , in the name of all the god at onc , 
 upon what meat doth thi our caesar feed 
 that he is grown so great ? age , thou art shame ! 
 rome , thou hast lost the breed of nobl blood ! 
 when went there by an age sinc the great flood 
 but it wa fame with more than with one man ? 
 when could they say till now that talk 'd of rome 
 that her wide wall encompass 'd but one man ? 
 now is it rome inde , and room enough , 
 when there is in it but one onli man . 
 o , you and i have heard our father say 
 there wa a brutu onc that would have brook 'd 
 the etern devil to keep hi state in rome 
 as easili as a king . 
 brutu . that you do love me , i am noth jealou ; 
 what you would work me to , i have some aim . 
 how i have thought of thi and of these time , 
 i shall recount hereaft ; for thi present , 
 i would not , so with love i might entreat you , 
 be ani further move . what you have said 
 i will consid ; what you have to say 
 i will with patienc hear , and find a time 
 both meet to hear and answer such high thing . 
 till then , my nobl friend , chew upon thi : 
 brutu had rather be a villag 
 than to reput himself a son of rome 
 under these hard condit as thi time 
 is like to lay upon us . 
 cassiu . i am glad that my weak word 
 have struck but thu much show of fire from brutu . 
 
 re-ent caesar and hi train . 
 
 brutu . the game are done , and caesar is return . 
 cassiu . as they pass by , pluck casca by the sleev , 
 and he will , after hi sour fashion , tell you 
 what hath proceed worthi note today . 
 brutu . i will do so . but , look you , cassiu , 
 the angri spot doth glow on caesar 's brow , 
 and all the rest look like a chidden train : 
 calpurnia 's cheek is pale , and cicero 
 look with such ferret and such fieri eye 
 as we have seen him in the capitol , 
 be cross 'd in confer by some senat . 
 cassiu . casca will tell us what the matter is . 
 caesar . antonio ! 
 antoni . caesar ? 
 caesar . let me have men about me that are fat , 
 sleek-head men , and such as sleep o ' night : 
 yond cassiu ha a lean and hungri look ; 
 he think too much ; such men are danger . 
 antoni . fear him not , caesar ; he 's not danger ; 
 he is a nobl roman and well given . 
 caesar . would he were fatter ! but i fear him not , 
 yet if my name were liabl to fear , 
 i do not know the man i should avoid 
 so soon as that spare cassiu . he read much , 
 he is a great observ , and he look 
 quit through the deed of men . he love no play , 
 as thou dost , antoni ; he hear no music ; 
 seldom he smile , and smile in such a sort 
 as if he mock 'd himself and scorn 'd hi spirit 
 that could be move to smile at anyth . 
 such men as he be never at heart 's eas 
 while they behold a greater than themselv , 
 and therefor are they veri danger . 
 i rather tell thee what is to be fear 'd 
 than what i fear , for alway i am caesar . 
 come on my right hand , for thi ear is deaf , 
 and tell me truli what thou think'st of him . 
 sennet . exeunt caesar and all hi train but casca . 
 casca . you pull 'd me by the cloak ; would you speak with me ? 
 brutu . ay , casca , tell us what hath chanc today 
 that caesar look so sad . 
 casca . whi , you were with him , were you not ? 
 brutu . i should not then ask casca what had chanc . 
 casca . whi , there wa a crown offer him , and be offer him , 
 he put it by with the back of hi hand , thu , and then the 
 peopl fell ashout . 
 brutu . what wa the second nois for ? 
 casca . whi , for that too . 
 cassiu . they shout thrice . what wa the last cri for ? 
 casca . whi , for that too . 
 brutu . wa the crown offer him thrice ? 
 casca . ay , marri , wast , and he put it by thrice , everi time gentler 
 than other , and at everi put by mine honest neighbor 
 shout . 
 cassiu . who offer him the crown ? 
 casca . whi , antoni . 
 brutu . tell us the manner of it , gentl casca . 
 casca . i can as well be hang 'd as tell the manner of it . it wa 
 mere fooleri ; i did not mark it . i saw mark antoni offer him a 
 crown ( yet 't wa not a crown neither , 't wa one of these 
 coronet ) and , as i told you , he put it by onc . but for all 
 that , to my think , he would fain have had it . then he offer 
 it to him again ; then he put it by again . but , to my think , he 
 wa veri loath to lay hi finger off it . and then he offer it 
 the third time ; he put it the third time by ; and still as he 
 refus it , the rabblement hoot and clap their chop hand 
 and threw up their sweati nightcap and utter such a deal of 
 stink breath becaus caesar refus the crown that it had 
 almost choke caesar , for he swound and fell down at it . and 
 for mine own part , i durst not laugh for fear of open my lip 
 and receiv the bad air . 
 cassiu . but , soft , i pray you , what , did caesar wound ? 
 casca . he fell down in the marketplac and foam at mouth and wa 
 speechless . 
 brutu . 't is veri like . he hath the fall sick . 
 cassiu . no , caesar hath it not , but you , and i , 
 and honest casca , we have the fall sick . 
 casca . i know not what you mean by that , but i am sure caesar fell 
 down . if the tagrag peopl did not clap him and hiss him 
 accord as he pleas and displeas them , as they use to do 
 the player in the theatr , i am no true man . 
 brutu . what said he when he came unto himself ? 
 casca . marri , befor he fell down , when he perceiv the common 
 herd wa glad he refus the crown , he pluck me ope hi doublet 
 and offer them hi throat to cut . an had been a man of ani 
 occup , if i would not have taken him at a word , i would i 
 might go to hell among the rogu . and so he fell . when he came 
 to himself again , he said , if he had done or said anyth amiss , 
 he desir their worship to think it wa hi infirm . three or 
 four wench where i stood cri , `` ala , good soul ! '' and forgav 
 him with all their heart . but there 's no heed to be taken of 
 them ; if caesar had stab their mother , they would have done 
 no less . 
 brutu . and after that he came , thu sad , away ? 
 casca . ay . 
 cassiu . did cicero say anyth ? 
 casca . ay , he spoke greek . 
 cassiu . to what effect ? 
 casca . nay , an i tell you that , i 'll ne'er look you i ' the face 
 again ; but those that understood him smile at one anoth and 
 shook their head ; but for mine own part , it wa greek to me . i 
 could tell you more news too : marullu and flaviu , for pull 
 scarf off caesar 's imag , are put to silenc . fare you well . 
 there wa more fooleri yet , if could rememb it . 
 cassiu . will you sup with me tonight , casca ? 
 casca . no , i am promis forth . 
 cassiu . will you dine with me tomorrow ? 
 casca . ay , if i be aliv , and your mind hold , and your dinner worth 
 the eat . 
 cassiu . good , i will expect you . 
 casca . do so , farewel , both . exit . 
 brutu . what a blunt fellow is thi grown to be ! 
 he wa quick mettl when he went to school . 
 cassiu . so is he now in execut 
 of ani bold or nobl enterpris , 
 howev he put on thi tardi form . 
 thi rude is a sauc to hi good wit , 
 which give men stomach to digest hi word 
 with better appetit . 
 brutu . and so it is . for thi time i will leav you . 
 tomorrow , if you pleas to speak with me , 
 i will come home to you , or , if you will , 
 come home to me and i will wait for you . 
 cassiu . i will do so . till then , think of the world . 
 exit brutu . 
 well , brutu , thou art nobl ; yet , i see 
 thi honor mettl may be wrought 
 from that it is dispos ; therefor it is meet 
 that nobl mind keep ever with their like ; 
 for who so firm that can not be seduc ? 
 caesar doth bear me hard , but he love brutu . 
 if i were brutu now and he were cassiu , 
 he should not humor me . i will thi night , 
 in sever hand , in at hi window throw , 
 as if they came from sever citizen , 
 write , all tend to the great opinion 
 that rome hold of hi name , wherein obscur 
 caesar 's ambit shall be glanc at . 
 and after thi let caesar seat him sure ; 
 for we will shake him , or wors day endur . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a street . thunder and lightn . 
 
 enter , from opposit side , casca , with hi sword drawn , and cicero . 
 
 cicero . good even , casca . brought you caesar home ? 
 whi are you breathless , and whi stare you so ? 
 casca . are not you move , when all the sway of earth 
 shake like a thing unfirm ? o cicero , 
 i have seen tempest when the scold wind 
 have rive the knotti oak , and i have seen 
 the ambiti ocean swell and rage and foam 
 to be exalt with the threaten cloud , 
 but never till tonight , never till now , 
 did i go through a tempest drop fire . 
 either there is a civil strife in heaven , 
 or els the world too sauci with the god 
 incens them to send destruct . 
 cicero . whi , saw you anyth more wonder ? 
 casca . a common slave- you know him well by sight- 
 held up hi left hand , which did flame and burn 
 like twenti torch join 'd , and yet hi hand 
 not sensibl of fire remain 'd unscorch 'd . 
 besides- i ha ' not sinc put up my sword- 
 against the capitol i met a lion , 
 who glaz 'd upon me and went surli by 
 without annoy me . and there were drawn 
 upon a heap a hundr ghastli women 
 transform with their fear , who swore they saw 
 men all in fire walk up and down the street . 
 and yesterday the bird of night did sit 
 even at noonday upon the marketplac , 
 howl and shriek . when these prodigi 
 do so conjointli meet , let not men say 
 `` these are their reason ; they are natur '' : 
 for i believ they are portent thing 
 unto the climat that they point upon . 
 cicero . inde , it is a strange-dispos time . 
 but men may constru thing after their fashion , 
 clean from the purpos of the thing themselv . 
 come caesar to the capitol tomorrow ? 
 casca . he doth , for he did bid antonio 
 send word to you he would be there tomorrow . 
 cicero . good then , casca . thi disturb sky 
 is not to walk in . 
 casca . farewel , cicero . exit cicero . 
 
 enter cassiu . 
 
 cassiu . who 's there ? 
 casca . a roman . 
 cassiu . casca , by your voic . 
 casca . your ear is good . cassiu , what night is thi ! 
 cassiu . a veri pleas night to honest men . 
 casca . who ever knew the heaven menac so ? 
 cassiu . those that have known the earth so full of fault . 
 for my part , i have walk 'd about the street , 
 submit me unto the peril night , 
 and thu unbrac , casca , as you see , 
 have bare my bosom to the thunderston ; 
 and when the cross blue lightn seem 'd to open 
 the breast of heaven , i did present myself 
 even in the aim and veri flash of it . 
 casca . but wherefor did you so much tempt the heaven ? 
 it is the part of men to fear and trembl 
 when the most mighti god by token send 
 such dread herald to astonish us . 
 cassiu . you are dull , casca , and those spark of life 
 that should be in a roman you do want , 
 or els you use not . you look pale and gaze 
 and put on fear and cast yourself in wonder 
 to see the strang impati of the heaven . 
 but if you would consid the true caus 
 whi all these fire , whi all these glide ghost , 
 whi bird and beast from qualiti and kind , 
 whi old men , fool , and children calcul , 
 whi all these thing chang from their ordin , 
 their natur , and preform faculti 
 to monstrou qualiti , whi , you shall find 
 that heaven hath infus them with these spirit 
 to make them instrument of fear and warn 
 unto some monstrou state . 
 now could i , casca , name to thee a man 
 most like thi dread night , 
 that thunder , lighten , open grave , and roar 
 as doth the lion in the capitol , 
 a man no mightier than thyself or me 
 in person action , yet prodigi grown 
 and fear , as these strang erupt are . 
 casca . 't is caesar that you mean , is it not , cassiu ? 
 cassiu . let it be who it is , for roman now 
 have thew and limb like to their ancestor . 
 but , woe the while ! our father ' mind are dead , 
 and we are govern 'd with our mother ' spirit ; 
 our yoke and suffer show us womanish . 
 casca . inde they say the senat tomorrow 
 mean to establish caesar as a king , 
 and he shall wear hi crown by sea and land 
 in everi place save here in itali . 
 cassiu . i know where i will wear thi dagger then : 
 cassiu from bondag will deliv cassiu . 
 therein , ye god , you make the weak most strong ; 
 therein , ye god , you tyrant do defeat . 
 nor stoni tower , nor wall of beaten brass , 
 nor airless dungeon , nor strong link of iron 
 can be retent to the strength of spirit ; 
 but life , be weari of these worldli bar , 
 never lack power to dismiss itself . 
 if i know thi , know all the world besid , 
 that part of tyranni that i do bear 
 i can shake off at pleasur . thunder still . 
 casca . so can i . 
 so everi bondman in hi own hand bear 
 the power to cancel hi captiv . 
 cassiu . and whi should caesar be a tyrant then ? 
 poor man ! i know he would not be a wolf 
 but that he see the roman are but sheep . 
 he were no lion , were not roman hind . 
 those that with hast will make a mighti fire 
 begin it with weak straw . what trash is rome , 
 what rubbish , and what offal , when it serv 
 for the base matter to illumin 
 so vile a thing as caesar ? but , o grief , 
 where hast thou led me ? i perhap speak thi 
 befor a will bondman ; then i know 
 my answer must be made . but i am arm 'd , 
 and danger are to me indiffer . 
 casca . you speak to casca , and to such a man 
 that is no fleer tell-tal . hold , my hand . 
 be factiou for redress of all these grief , 
 and i will set thi foot of mine as far 
 as who goe farthest . 
 cassiu . there 's a bargain made . 
 now know you , casca , i have move alreadi 
 some certain of the noblest-mind roman 
 to undergo with me an enterpris 
 of honorable-danger consequ ; 
 and i do know by thi , they stay for me 
 in pompey 's porch . for now , thi fear night , 
 there is no stir or walk in the street , 
 and the complexion of the element 
 in favor 's like the work we have in hand , 
 most bloodi , fieri , and most terribl . 
 
 enter cinna . 
 
 casca . stand close awhil , for here come one in hast . 
 cassiu . 't is cinna , i do know him by hi gait ; 
 he is a friend . cinna , where hast you so ? 
 cinna . to find out you . who 's that ? metellu cimber ? 
 cassiu . no , it is casca , one incorpor 
 to our attempt . am i not stay 'd for , cinna ? 
 cinna . i am glad o n't . what a fear night is thi ! 
 there 's two or three of us have seen strang sight . 
 cassiu . am i not stay 'd for ? tell me . 
 cinna . ye , you are . 
 o cassiu , if you could 
 but win the nobl brutu to our party- 
 cassiu . be you content . good cinna , take thi paper , 
 and look you lay it in the praetor 's chair , 
 where brutu may but find it ; and throw thi 
 in at hi window ; set thi up with wax 
 upon old brutu ' statu . all thi done , 
 repair to pompey 's porch , where you shall find us . 
 is deciu brutu and treboniu there ? 
 cinna . all but metellu cimber , and he 's gone 
 to seek you at your hous . well , i will hie 
 and so bestow these paper as you bade me . 
 cassiu . that done , repair to pompey 's theatr . 
 exit cinna . 
 come , casca , you and i will yet ere day 
 see brutu at hi hous . three part of him 
 is our alreadi , and the man entir 
 upon the next encount yield him our . 
 casca . o , he sit high in all the peopl 's heart , 
 and that which would appear offens in us , 
 hi counten , like richest alchemi , 
 will chang to virtu and to worthi . 
 cassiu . him and hi worth and our great need of him 
 you have right well conceit . let us go , 
 for it is after midnight , and ere day 
 we will awak him and be sure of him . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 
 enter brutu in hi orchard . 
 
 brutu . what , luciu , ho ! 
 i can not , by the progress of the star , 
 give guess how near to day . luciu , i say ! 
 i would it were my fault to sleep so soundli . 
 when , luciu , when ? awak , i say ! what , luciu ! 
 
 enter luciu . 
 
 luciu . call 'd you , my lord ? 
 brutu . get me a taper in my studi , luciu . 
 when it is light , come and call me here . 
 luciu . i will , my lord . exit . 
 brutu . it must be by hi death , and , for my part , 
 i know no person caus to spurn at him , 
 but for the gener . he would be crown 'd : 
 how that might chang hi natur , there 's the question . 
 it is the bright day that bring forth the adder 
 and that crave wari walk . crown him that , 
 and then , i grant , we put a sting in him 
 that at hi will he may do danger with . 
 the abus of great is when it disjoin 
 remors from power , and , to speak truth of caesar , 
 i have not known when hi affect sway 'd 
 more than hi reason . but 't is a common proof 
 that lowli is young ambit 's ladder , 
 whereto the climber-upward turn hi face ; 
 but when he onc attain the upmost round , 
 he then unto the ladder turn hi back , 
 look in the cloud , scorn the base degre 
 by which he did ascend . so caesar may ; 
 then , lest he may , prevent . and , sinc the quarrel 
 will bear no color for the thing he is , 
 fashion it thu , that what he is , augment , 
 would run to these and these extrem ; 
 and therefor think him as a serpent 's egg 
 which hatch 'd would as hi kind grow mischiev , 
 and kill him in the shell . 
 
 re-ent luciu . 
 
 luciu . the taper burneth in your closet , sir . 
 search the window for a flint i found 
 thi paper thu seal 'd up , and i am sure 
 it did not lie there when i went to bed . 
 give him the letter . 
 brutu . get you to bed again , it is not day . 
 is not tomorrow , boy , the ide of march ? 
 luciu . i know not , sir . 
 brutu . look in the calendar and bring me word . 
 luciu . i will , sir . exit . 
 brutu . the exhal whizz in the air 
 give so much light that i may read by them . 
 open the letter and read . 
 `` brutu , thou sleep'st : awak and see thyself ! 
 shall rome , etc . speak , strike , redress ! '' 
 
 `` brutu , thou sleep'st : awak ! '' 
 such instig have been often dropp 'd 
 where i have took them up . 
 `` shall rome , etc . '' thu must i piec it out . 
 shall rome stand under one man 's awe ? what , rome ? 
 my ancestor did from the street of rome 
 the tarquin drive , when he wa call 'd a king . 
 `` speak , strike , redress ! '' am i entreat 
 to speak and strike ? o rome , i make thee promis , 
 if the redress will follow , thou receivest 
 thi full petit at the hand of brutu ! 
 
 re-ent luciu . 
 
 luciu . sir , march is wast fifteen day . 
 knock within . 
 brutu . 't is good . go to the gate , somebodi knock . 
 exit luciu . 
 sinc cassiu first did whet me against caesar 
 i have not slept . 
 between the act of a dread thing 
 and the first motion , all the interim is 
 like a phantasma or a hideou dream ; 
 the geniu and the mortal instrument 
 are then in council , and the state of man , 
 like to a littl kingdom , suffer then 
 the natur of an insurrect . 
 
 re-ent luciu . 
 
 luciu . sir , 't is your brother cassiu at the door , 
 who doth desir to see you . 
 brutu . is he alon ? 
 luciu . no , sir , there are more with him . 
 brutu . do you know them ? 
 luciu . no , sir , their hat are pluck 'd about their ear , 
 and half their face buri in their cloak , 
 that by no mean i may discov them 
 by ani mark of favor . 
 brutu . let 'em enter . exit luciu . 
 they are the faction . o conspiraci , 
 shamest thou to show thi danger brow by night , 
 when evil are most free ? o , then , by day 
 where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough 
 to mask thi monstrou visag ? seek none , conspiraci ; 
 hide it in smile and affabl ; 
 for if thou path , thi nativ semblanc on , 
 not erebu itself were dim enough 
 to hide thee from prevent . 
 
 enter the conspir , cassiu , casca , deciu , cinna , 
 metellu cimber , and treboniu . 
 
 cassiu . i think we are too bold upon your rest . 
 good morrow , brutu , do we troubl you ? 
 brutu . i have been up thi hour , awak all night . 
 know i these men that come along with you ? 
 cassiu . ye , everi man of them , and no man here 
 but honor you , and everi one doth wish 
 you had but that opinion of yourself 
 which everi nobl roman bear of you . 
 thi is treboniu . 
 brutu . he is welcom hither . 
 cassiu . thi , deciu brutu . 
 brutu . he is welcom too . 
 cassiu . thi , casca ; thi , cinna ; and thi , metellu cimber . 
 brutu . they are all welcom . 
 what watch care do interpos themselv 
 betwixt your eye and night ? 
 cassiu . shall i entreat a word ? they whisper . 
 deciu . here lie the east . doth not the day break here ? 
 casca . no . 
 cinna . o , pardon , sir , it doth , and yongrey line 
 that fret the cloud are messeng of day . 
 casca . you shall confess that you are both deceiv . 
 here , as i point my sword , the sun aris , 
 which is a great way grow on the south , 
 weigh the youth season of the year . 
 some two month henc up higher toward the north 
 he first present hi fire , and the high east 
 stand as the capitol , directli here . 
 brutu . give me your hand all over , one by one . 
 cassiu . and let us swear our resolut . 
 brutu . no , not an oath . if not the face of men , 
 the suffer of our soul , the time 's abuse- 
 if these be motiv weak , break off betim , 
 and everi man henc to hi idl bed ; 
 so let high-sight tyranni rang on 
 till each man drop by lotteri . but if these , 
 as i am sure they do , bear fire enough 
 to kindl coward and to steel with valor 
 the melt spirit of women , then , countrymen , 
 what need we ani spur but our own caus 
 to prick us to redress ? what other bond 
 than secret roman that have spoke the word 
 and will not palter ? and what other oath 
 than honesti to honesti engag 
 that thi shall be or we will fall for it ? 
 swear priest and coward and men cautel , 
 old feebl carrion and such suffer soul 
 that welcom wrong ; unto bad caus swear 
 such creatur as men doubt ; but do not stain 
 the even virtu of our enterpris , 
 nor the insuppress mettl of our spirit , 
 to think that or our caus or our perform 
 did need an oath ; when everi drop of blood 
 that everi roman bear , and nobli bear , 
 is guilti of a sever bastardi 
 if he do break the smallest particl 
 of ani promis that hath pass 'd from him . 
 cassiu . but what of cicero ? shall we sound him ? 
 i think he will stand veri strong with us . 
 casca . let us not leav him out . 
 cinna . no , by no mean . 
 metellu . o , let us have him , for hi silver hair 
 will purchas us a good opinion , 
 and buy men 's voic to commend our deed . 
 it shall be said hi judgement rule our hand ; 
 our youth and wild shall no whit appear , 
 but all be buri in hi graviti . 
 brutu . o , name him not ; let us not break with him , 
 for he will never follow anyth 
 that other men begin . 
 cassiu . then leav him out . 
 casca . inde he is not fit . 
 deciu . shall no man els be touch 'd but onli caesar ? 
 cassiu . deciu , well urg . i think it is not meet 
 mark antoni , so well belov of caesar , 
 should outliv caesar . we shall find of him 
 a shrewd contriv ; and you know hi mean , 
 if he improv them , may well stretch so far 
 as to annoy us all , which to prevent , 
 let antoni and caesar fall togeth . 
 brutu . our cours will seem too bloodi , caiu cassiu , 
 to cut the head off and then hack the limb 
 like wrath in death and envi afterward ; 
 for antoni is but a limb of caesar . 
 let us be sacrific , but not butcher , caiu . 
 we all stand up against the spirit of caesar , 
 and in the spirit of men there is no blood . 
 o , that we then could come by caesar 's spirit , 
 and not dismemb caesar ! but , ala , 
 caesar must bleed for it ! and , gentl friend , 
 let 's kill him boldli , but not wrath ; 
 let 's carv him as a dish fit for the god , 
 not hew him as a carcass fit for hound ; 
 and let our heart , as subtl master do , 
 stir up their servant to an act of rage 
 and after seem to chide 'em . thi shall make 
 our purpos necessari and not enviou , 
 which so appear to the common eye , 
 we shall be call 'd purger , not murder . 
 and for mark antoni , think not of him , 
 for he can do no more than caesar 's arm 
 when caesar 's head is off . 
 cassiu . yet i fear him , 
 for in the ingrat love he bear to caesar- 
 brutu . ala , good cassiu , do not think of him . 
 if he love caesar , all that he can do 
 is to himself , take thought and die for caesar . 
 and that were much he should , for he is given 
 to sport , to wild , and much compani . 
 treboniu . there is no fear in him-let him not die , 
 for he will live and laugh at thi hereaft . 
 clock strike . 
 brutu . peac , count the clock . 
 cassiu . the clock hath stricken three . 
 treboniu . 't is time to part . 
 cassiu . but it is doubt yet 
 whether caesar will come forth today or no , 
 for he is superstiti grown of late , 
 quit from the main opinion he held onc 
 of fantasi , of dream , and ceremoni . 
 it may be these appar prodigi , 
 the unaccustom 'd terror of thi night , 
 and the persuas of hi augur 
 may hold him from the capitol today . 
 deciu . never fear that . if he be so resolv , 
 i can o'ersway him , for he love to hear 
 that unicorn may be betray 'd with tree , 
 and bear with glass , eleph with hole , 
 lion with toil , and men with flatter ; 
 but when i tell him he hate flatter , 
 he say he doe , be then most flatter . 
 let me work ; 
 for i can give hi humor the true bent , 
 and i will bring him to the capitol . 
 cassiu . nay , we will all of us be there to fetch him . 
 brutu . by the eighth hour . is that the utter most ? 
 cinna . be that the uttermost , and fail not then . 
 metellu . caiu ligariu doth bear caesar hard , 
 who rate him for speak well of pompey . 
 i wonder none of you have thought of him . 
 brutu . now , good metellu , go along by him . 
 he love me well , and i have given him reason ; 
 send him but hither , and i 'll fashion him . 
 cassiu . the morn come upon 's . we 'll leav you , brutu , 
 and , friend , dispers yourselv , but all rememb 
 what you have said and show yourselv true roman . 
 brutu . good gentlemen , look fresh and merrili ; 
 let not our look put on our purpos , 
 but bear it as our roman actor do , 
 with untir spirit and formal constanc . 
 and so , good morrow to you everi one . 
 exeunt all but brutu . 
 boy ! luciu ! fast asleep ? it is no matter . 
 enjoy the honey-heavi dew of slumber ; 
 thou hast no figur nor no fantasi , 
 which busi care draw in the brain of men ; 
 therefor thou sleep'st so sound . 
 
 enter portia . 
 
 portia . brutu , my lord ! 
 brutu . portia , what mean you ? wherefor rise you now ? 
 it is not for your health thu to commit 
 your weak condit to the raw cold morn . 
 portia . nor for your neither . have ungent , brutu , 
 stole from my bed ; and yesternight at supper 
 you suddenli aros and walk 'd about , 
 muse and sigh , with your arm across ; 
 and when i ask 'd you what the matter wa , 
 you stare upon me with ungentl look . 
 i urg you further ; then you scratch 'd your head , 
 and too impati stamp 'd with your foot . 
 yet i insist , yet you answer 'd not , 
 but with an angri waiter of your hand 
 gave sign for me to leav you . so i did , 
 fear to strengthen that impati 
 which seem 'd too much enkindl , and withal 
 hope it wa but an effect of humor , 
 which sometim hath hi hour with everi man . 
 it will not let you eat , nor talk , nor sleep , 
 and , could it work so much upon your shape 
 as it hath much prevail 'd on your condit , 
 i should not know you , brutu . dear my lord , 
 make me acquaint with your caus of grief . 
 brutu . i am not well in health , and that is all . 
 portia . brutu is wise , and , were he not in health , 
 he would embrac the mean to come by it . 
 brutu . whi , so i do . good portia , go to bed . 
 portia . is brutu sick , and is it physic 
 to walk unbrac and suck up the humor 
 of the dank morn ? what , is brutu sick , 
 and will he steal out of hi wholesom bed 
 to dare the vile contagion of the night 
 and tempt the rheumi and unpurg air 
 to add unto hi sick ? no , my brutu , 
 you have some sick offens within your mind , 
 which by the right and virtu of my place 
 i ought to know of ; and , upon my knee , 
 i charm you , by my onc commend beauti , 
 by all your vow of love and that great vow 
 which did incorpor and make us one , 
 that you unfold to me , yourself , your half , 
 whi you are heavi and what men tonight 
 have had resort to you ; for here have been 
 some six or seven , who did hide their face 
 even from dark . 
 brutu . kneel not , gentl portia . 
 portia . i should not need , if you were gentl brutu . 
 within the bond of marriag , tell me , brutu , 
 is it except i should know no secret 
 that appertain to you ? am i yourself 
 but , as it were , in sort or limit , 
 to keep with you at meal , comfort your bed , 
 and talk to you sometim ? dwell i but in the suburb 
 of your good pleasur ? if it be no more , 
 portia is brutu ' harlot , not hi wife . 
 brutu . you are my true and honor wife , 
 as dear to me as are the ruddi drop 
 that visit my sad heart . 
 portia . if thi were true , then should i know thi secret . 
 i grant i am a woman , but withal 
 a woman that lord brutu took to wife . 
 i grant i am a woman , but withal 
 a woman well reput , cato 's daughter . 
 think you i am no stronger than my sex , 
 be so father 'd and so husband ? 
 tell me your counsel , i will not disclos 'em . 
 i have made strong proof of my constanc , 
 give myself a voluntari wound 
 here in the thigh . can i bear that with patienc 
 and not my husband 's secret ? 
 brutu . o ye god , 
 render me worthi of thi nobl wife ! knock within . 
 hark , hark , one knock . portia , go in awhil , 
 and by and by thi bosom shall partak 
 the secret of my heart . 
 all my engag i will constru to thee , 
 all the characteri of my sad brow . 
 leav me with hast . [ exit portia . ] luciu , who 's that knock ? 
 
 re-ent luciu with ligariu . 
 
 luciu . here is a sick man that would speak with you . 
 brutu . caiu ligariu , that metellu spake of . 
 boy , stand asid . caiu ligariu , how ? 
 ligariu . vouchsaf good morrow from a feebl tongu . 
 brutu . o , what a time have you chose out , brave caiu , 
 to wear a kerchief ! would you were not sick ! 
 ligariu . i am not sick , if brutu have in hand 
 ani exploit worthi the name of honor . 
 brutu . such an exploit have i in hand , ligariu , 
 had you a health ear to hear of it . 
 ligariu . by all the god that roman bow befor , 
 i here discard my sick ! soul of rome ! 
 brave son , deriv from honor loin ! 
 thou , like an exorcist , hast conjur up 
 my mortifi spirit . now bid me run , 
 and i will strive with thing imposs , 
 yea , get the better of them . what 's to do ? 
 brutu . a piec of work that will make sick men whole . 
 ligariu . but are not some whole that we must make sick ? 
 brutu . that must we also . what it is , my caiu , 
 i shall unfold to thee , as we are go 
 to whom it must be done . 
 ligariu . set on your foot , 
 and with a heart new-fir i follow you , 
 to do i know not what ; but it sufficeth 
 that brutu lead me on . 
 brutu . follow me then . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 caesar 's hous . thunder and lightn . 
 
 enter caesar , in hi nightgown . 
 
 caesar . nor heaven nor earth have been at peac tonight . 
 thrice hath calpurnia in her sleep cri out , 
 `` help , ho ! they murther caesar ! '' who 's within ? 
 
 enter a servant . 
 
 servant . my lord ? 
 caesar . go bid the priest do present sacrific , 
 and bring me their opinion of success . 
 servant . i will , my lord . exit . 
 
 enter calpurnia . 
 
 calpurnia . what mean you , caesar ? think you to walk forth ? 
 you shall not stir out of your hous today . 
 caesar . caesar shall forth : the thing that threaten 'd me 
 ne'er look 'd but on my back ; when they shall see 
 the face of caesar , they are vanish . 
 calpurnia . caesar , i i stood on ceremoni , 
 yet now they fright me . there is one within , 
 besid the thing that we have heard and seen , 
 recount most horrid sight seen by the watch . 
 a lioness hath whelp in the street ; 
 and grave have yawn 'd , and yield up their dead ; 
 fierc fieri warrior fight upon the cloud , 
 in rank and squadron and right form of war , 
 which drizzl blood upon the capitol ; 
 the nois of battl hurtl in the air , 
 hors did neigh and die men did groan , 
 and ghost did shriek and squeal about the street . 
 o caesar ! these thing are beyond all use , 
 and i do fear them . 
 caesar . what can be avoid 
 whose end is purpos by the mighti god ? 
 yet caesar shall go forth , for these predict 
 are to the world in gener as to caesar . 
 calpurnia . when beggar die , there are no comet seen ; 
 the heaven themselv blaze forth the death of princ . 
 caesar . coward die mani time befor their death ; 
 the valiant never tast of death but onc . 
 of all the wonder that i yet have heard , 
 it seem to me most strang that men should fear 
 see that death , a necessari end , 
 will come when it will come . 
 
 re-ent servant . 
 
 what say the augur ? 
 servant . they would not have you to stir forth today . 
 pluck the entrail of an offer forth , 
 they could not find a heart within the beast . 
 caesar . the god do thi in shame of cowardic . 
 caesar should be a beast without a heart 
 if he should stay at home today for fear . 
 no , caesar shall not . danger know full well 
 that caesar is more danger than he . 
 we are two lion litter 'd in one day , 
 and i the elder and more terribl . 
 and caesar shall go forth . 
 calpurnia . ala , my lord , 
 your wisdom is consum in confid . 
 do not go forth today . call it my fear 
 that keep you in the hous and not your own . 
 we 'll send mark antoni to the senat hous , 
 and he shall say you are not well today . 
 let me , upon my knee , prevail in thi . 
 caesar . mark antoni shall say i am not well , 
 and , for thi humor , i will stay at home . 
 
 enter deciu . 
 
 here 's deciu brutu , he shall tell them so . 
 deciu . caesar , all hail ! good morrow , worthi caesar ! 
 i come to fetch you to the senat hous . 
 caesar . and you are come in veri happi time 
 to bear my greet to the senat 
 and tell them that i will not come today . 
 can not , is fals , and that i dare not , falser : 
 i will not come today . tell them so , deciu . 
 calpurnia . say he is sick . 
 caesar . shall caesar send a lie ? 
 have i in conquest stretch 'd mine arm so far 
 to be afeard to tell greybeard the truth ? 
 deciu , go tell them caesar will not come . 
 deciu . most mighti caesar , let me know some caus , 
 lest i be laugh 'd at when i tell them so . 
 caesar . the caus is in my will : i will not come , 
 that is enough to satisfi the senat . 
 but , for your privat satisfact , 
 becaus i love you , i will let you know . 
 calpurnia here , my wife , stay me at home ; 
 she dreamt tonight she saw my statu , 
 which , like a fountain with an hundr spout , 
 did run pure blood , and mani lusti roman 
 came smile and did bath their hand in it . 
 and these doe she appli for warn and portent 
 and evil immin , and on her knee 
 hath begg 'd that i will stay at home today . 
 deciu . thi dream is all amiss interpret ; 
 it wa a vision fair and fortun . 
 your statu spout blood in mani pipe , 
 in which so mani smile roman bath , 
 signifi that from you great rome shall suck 
 reviv blood , and that great men shall press 
 for tinctur , stain , relic , and cogniz . 
 thi by calpurnia 's dream is signifi . 
 caesar . and thi way have you well expound it . 
 deciu . i have , when you have heard what i can say . 
 and know it now , the senat have conclud 
 to give thi day a crown to mighti caesar . 
 if you shall send them word you will not come , 
 their mind may chang . besid , it were a mock 
 apt to be render 'd , for someon to say 
 `` break up the senat till anoth time , 
 when caesar 's wife shall meet with better dream . '' 
 if caesar hide himself , shall they not whisper 
 `` lo , caesar is afraid '' ? 
 pardon me , caesar , for my dear dear love 
 to your proceed bid me tell you thi , 
 and reason to my love is liabl . 
 caesar . how foolish do your fear seem now , calpurnia ! 
 i am asham i did yield to them . 
 give me my robe , for i will go . 
 
 enter publiu , brutu , ligariu , metellu , casca , 
 treboniu , and cinna . 
 
 and look where publiu is come to fetch me . 
 publiu . good morrow , caesar . 
 caesar . welcom , publiu . 
 what , brutu , are you stirr 'd so earli too ? 
 good morrow , casca . caiu ligariu , 
 caesar wa ne'er so much your enemi 
 as that same agu which hath made you lean . 
 what is't o'clock ? 
 brutu . caesar , 't is strucken eight . 
 caesar . i thank you for your pain and courtesi . 
 
 enter antoni . 
 
 see , antoni , that revel long o ' night , 
 is notwithstand up . good morrow , antoni . 
 antoni . so to most nobl caesar . 
 caesar . bid them prepar within . 
 i am to blame to be thu wait for . 
 now , cinna ; now , metellu ; what , treboniu , 
 i have an hour 's talk in store for you ; 
 rememb that you call on me today ; 
 be near me , that i may rememb you . 
 treboniu . caesar , i will . [ asid . ] and so near will i be 
 that your best friend shall wish i had been further . 
 caesar . good friend , go in and tast some wine with me , 
 and we like friend will straightway go togeth . 
 brutu . [ asid . ] that everi like is not the same , o caesar , 
 the heart of brutu yearn to think upon ! exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a street near the capitol . 
 
 enter artemidoru , read paper . 
 
 artemidoru . `` caesar , bewar of brutu ; take heed of cassiu ; come 
 not near casca ; have an eye to cinna ; trust not treboniu ; mark 
 well metellu cimber ; deciu brutu love thee not ; thou hast 
 wrong caiu ligariu . there is but one mind in all these men , 
 and it is bent against caesar . if thou beest not immort , look 
 about you . secur give way to conspiraci . the mighti god 
 defend thee ! 
 thi lover , artemidoru . '' 
 here will i stand till caesar pass along , 
 and as a suitor will i give him thi . 
 my heart lament that virtu can not live 
 out of the teeth of emul . 
 if thou read thi , o caesar , thou mayest live ; 
 if not , the fate with traitor do contriv . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 anoth part of the same street , befor the hous of brutu . 
 
 enter portia and luciu . 
 
 portia . i prithe , boy , run to the senat hous ; 
 stay not to answer me , but get thee gone . 
 whi dost thou stay ? 
 luciu . to know my errand , madam . 
 portia . i would have had thee there , and here again , 
 ere i can tell thee what thou shouldst do there . 
 o constanc , be strong upon my side ! 
 set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongu ! 
 i have a man 's mind , but a woman 's might . 
 how hard it is for women to keep counsel ! 
 art thou here yet ? 
 luciu . madam , what should i do ? 
 run to the capitol , and noth els ? 
 and so return to you , and noth els ? 
 portia . ye , bring me word , boy , if thi lord look well , 
 for he went sickli forth ; and take good note 
 what caesar doth , what suitor press to him . 
 hark , boy , what nois is that ? 
 luciu . i hear none , madam . 
 portia . prithe , listen well . 
 i heard a bustl rumor like a fray , 
 and the wind bring it from the capitol . 
 luciu . sooth , madam , i hear noth . 
 
 enter the soothsay . 
 
 portia . come hither , fellow ; 
 which way hast thou been ? 
 soothsay . at mine own hous , good ladi . 
 portia . what is't o'clock ? 
 soothsay . about the ninth hour , ladi . 
 portia . is caesar yet gone to the capitol ? 
 soothsay . madam , not yet . i go to take my stand 
 to see him pass on to the capitol . 
 portia . thou hast some suit to caesar , hast thou not ? 
 soothsay . that i have , ladi . if it will pleas caesar 
 to be so good to caesar as to hear me , 
 i shall beseech him to befriend himself . 
 portia . whi , know'st thou ani harm 's intend toward him ? 
 soothsay . none that i know will be , much that i fear may chanc . 
 good morrow to you . here the street is narrow , 
 the throng that follow caesar at the heel , 
 of senat , of praetor , common suitor , 
 will crowd a feebl man almost to death . 
 i 'll get me to a place more void and there 
 speak to great caesar as he come along . exit . 
 portia . i must go in . ay me , how weak a thing 
 the heart of woman is ! o brutu , 
 the heaven speed thee in thine enterpris ! 
 sure , the boy heard me . brutu hath a suit 
 that caesar will not grant . o , i grow faint . 
 run , luciu , and commend me to my lord ; 
 say i am merri . come to me again , 
 and bring me word what he doth say to thee . 
 exeunt sever . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 rome . befor the capitol ; the senat sit abov . 
 a crowd of peopl , among them artemidoru and the soothsay . 
 
 flourish . enter caesar , brutu , cassiu , casca , deciu , metellu , 
 treboniu , cinna , antoni , lepidu , popiliu , publiu , and other . 
 
 caesar . the ide of march are come . 
 soothsay . ay , caesar , but not gone . 
 a hail , caesar ! read thi schedul . 
 deciu . treboniu doth desir you to o'er read , 
 at your best leisur , thi hi humbl suit . 
 artemidoru . o caesar , read mine first , for mine 's a suit 
 that touch caesar nearer . read it , great caesar . 
 caesar . what touch us ourself shall be last serv . 
 artemidoru . delay not , caesar ; read it instantli . 
 caesar . what , is the fellow mad ? 
 publiu . sirrah , give place . 
 cassiu . what , urg you your petit in the street ? 
 come to the capitol . 
 
 caesar goe up to the senat hous , the rest follow . 
 
 popiliu . i wish your enterpris today may thrive . 
 cassiu . what enterpris , popiliu ? 
 popiliu . fare you well . 
 advanc to caesar . 
 brutu . what said popiliu lena ? 
 cassiu . he wish 'd today our enterpris might thrive . 
 i fear our purpos is discov . 
 brutu . look , how he make to caesar . mark him . 
 cassiu . casca , 
 be sudden , for we fear prevent . 
 brutu , what shall be done ? if thi be known , 
 cassiu or caesar never shall turn back , 
 for i will slay myself . 
 brutu . cassiu , be constant . 
 popiliu lena speak not of our purpos ; 
 for , look , he smile , and caesar doth not chang . 
 cassiu . treboniu know hi time , for , look you , brutu , 
 he draw mark antoni out of the way . 
 exeunt antoni and treboniu . 
 deciu . where is metellu cimber ? let him 
 and present prefer hi suit to caesar . 
 brutu . he is address 'd ; press near and second him . 
 cinna . casca , you are the first that rear your hand . 
 caesar . are we all readi ? what is now amiss 
 that caesar and hi senat must redress ? 
 metellu . most high , most mighti , and most puissant caesar , 
 metellu cimber throw befor thi seat 
 an humbl heart . kneel . 
 caesar . i must prevent thee , cimber . 
 these couch and these lowli courtesi 
 might fire the blood of ordinari men 
 and turn preordin and first decre 
 into the law of children . be not fond 
 to think that caesar bear such rebel blood 
 that will be thaw 'd from the true qualiti 
 with that which melteth fools- i mean sweet word , 
 low-crook court'si , and base spaniel-fawn . 
 thi brother by decre is banish . 
 if thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him , 
 i spurn thee like a cur out of my way . 
 know , caesar doth not wrong , nor without caus 
 will he be satisfi . 
 metellu . is there no voic more worthi than my own , 
 to sound more sweetli in great caesar 's ear 
 for the repeal of my banish 'd brother ? 
 brutu . i kiss thi hand , but not in flatteri , caesar , 
 desir thee that publiu cimber may 
 have an immedi freedom of repeal . 
 caesar . what , brutu ? 
 cassiu . pardon , caesar ! caesar , pardon ! 
 as low as to thi foot doth cassiu fall 
 to beg enfranchis for publiu cimber . 
 caesar . i could be well move , if i were as you ; 
 if i could pray to move , prayer would move me ; 
 but i am constant as the northern star , 
 of whose true-fix 'd and rest qualiti 
 there is no fellow in the firmament . 
 the sky are paint with unnumb 'd spark ; 
 they are all fire and everi one doth shine ; 
 but there 's but one in all doth hold hi place . 
 so in the world , 't is furnish 'd well with men , 
 and men are flesh and blood , and apprehens ; 
 yet in the number i do know but one 
 that unassail hold on hi rank , 
 unshak of motion ; and that i am he , 
 let me a littl show it , even in thi ; 
 that i wa constant cimber should be banish 'd , 
 and constant do remain to keep him so . 
 cinna . o caesar- 
 caesar . henc ! wilt thou lift up olympu ? 
 deciu . great caesar- 
 caesar . doth not brutu bootless kneel ? 
 casca . speak , hand , for me ! 
 casca first , then the other conspir 
 and marcu brutu stab caesar . 
 caesar . et tu , brute ? - then fall , caesar ! die . 
 cinna . liberti ! freedom ! tyranni is dead ! 
 run henc , proclaim , cri it about the street . 
 cassiu . some to the common pulpit and cri out 
 `` liberti , freedom , and enfranchis ! '' 
 brutu . peopl and senat , be not affright , 
 fli not , stand still ; ambit 's debt is paid . 
 casca . go to the pulpit , brutu . 
 deciu . and cassiu too . 
 brutu . where 's publiu ? 
 cinna . here , quit confound with thi mutini . 
 metellu . stand fast togeth , lest some friend of caesar 's 
 should chance- 
 brutu . talk not of stand . publiu , good cheer , 
 there is no harm intend to your person , 
 nor to no roman els . so tell them , publiu . 
 cassiu . and leav us , publiu , lest that the peopl 
 rush on us should do your age some mischief . 
 brutu . do so , and let no man abid thi deed 
 but we the doer . 
 
 re-ent treboniu . 
 
 cassiu . where is antoni ? 
 treboniu . fled to hi hous amaz . 
 men , wive , and children stare , cri out , and run 
 as it were doomsday . 
 brutu . fate , we will know your pleasur . 
 that we shall die , we know ; 't is but the time 
 and draw day out that men stand upon . 
 cassiu . whi , he that cut off twenti year of life 
 cut off so mani year of fear death . 
 brutu . grant that , and then is death a benefit ; 
 so are we caesar 's friend that have abridg 
 hi time of fear death . stoop , roman , stoop , 
 and let us bath our hand in caesar 's blood 
 up to the elbow , and besmear our sword ; 
 then walk we forth , even to the marketplac , 
 and wave our red weapon o'er our head , 
 let 's all cri , `` peac , freedom , and liberti ! '' 
 cassiu . stoop then , and wash. how mani age henc 
 shall thi our lofti scene be act over 
 in state unborn and accent yet unknown ! 
 brutu . how mani time shall caesar bleed in sport , 
 that now on pompey 's basi lie along 
 no worthier than the dust ! 
 cassiu . so oft as that shall be , 
 so often shall the knot of us be call 'd 
 the men that gave their countri liberti . 
 deciu . what , shall we forth ? 
 cassiu . ay , everi man away . 
 brutu shall lead , and we will grace hi heel 
 with the most boldest and best heart of rome . 
 
 enter a servant . 
 
 brutu . soft , who come here ? a friend of antoni 's . 
 servant . thu , brutu , did my master bid me kneel , 
 thu did mark antoni bid me fall down , 
 and , be prostrat , thu he bade me say : 
 brutu is nobl , wise , valiant , and honest ; 
 caesar wa mighti , bold , royal , and love . 
 say i love brutu and i honor him ; 
 say i fear 'd caesar , honor 'd him , and love him . 
 if brutu will vouchsaf that antoni 
 may safe come to him and be resolv 
 how caesar hath deserv to lie in death , 
 mark antoni shall not love caesar dead 
 so well as brutu live , but will follow 
 the fortun and affair of nobl brutu 
 thorough the hazard of thi untrod state 
 with all true faith . so say my master antoni . 
 brutu . thi master is a wise and valiant roman ; 
 i never thought him wors . 
 tell him , so pleas him come unto thi place , 
 he shall be satisfi and , by my honor , 
 depart untouch 'd . 
 servant . i 'll fetch him present . exit . 
 brutu . i know that we shall have him well to friend . 
 cassiu . i wish we may , but yet have i a mind 
 that fear him much , and my misgiv still 
 fall shrewdli to the purpos . 
 
 re-ent antoni . 
 
 brutu . but here come antoni . welcom , mark antoni . 
 antoni . o mighti caesar ! dost thou lie so low ? 
 are all thi conquest , glori , triumph , spoil , 
 shrunk to thi littl measur ? fare thee well . 
 i know not , gentlemen , what you intend , 
 who els must be let blood , who els is rank . 
 if i myself , there is no hour so fit 
 as caesar 's death 's hour , nor no instrument 
 of half that worth as those your sword , made rich 
 with the most nobl blood of all thi world . 
 i do beseech ye , if you bear me hard , 
 now , whilst your purpl hand do reek and smoke , 
 fulfil your pleasur . live a thousand year , 
 i shall not find myself so apt to die ; 
 no place will pleas me so , no mean of death , 
 as here by caesar , and by you cut off , 
 the choic and master spirit of thi age . 
 brutu . o antoni , beg not your death of us ! 
 though now we must appear bloodi and cruel , 
 as , by our hand and thi our present act 
 you see we do , yet see you but our hand 
 and thi the bleed busi they have done . 
 our heart you see not ; they are piti ; 
 and piti to the gener wrong of rome- 
 as fire drive out fire , so piti pity- 
 hath done thi deed on caesar . for your part , 
 to you our sword have leaden point , mark antoni ; 
 our arm in strength of malic , and our heart 
 of brother ' temper , do receiv you in 
 with all kind love , good thought , and rever . 
 cassiu . your voic shall be as strong as ani man 's 
 in the dispos of new digniti . 
 brutu . onli be patient till we have appeas 
 the multitud , besid themselv with fear , 
 and then we will deliv you the caus 
 whi i , that did love caesar when i struck him , 
 have thu proceed . 
 antoni . i doubt not of your wisdom . 
 let each man render me hi bloodi hand . 
 first , marcu brutu , will i shake with you ; 
 next , caiu cassiu , do i take your hand ; 
 now , deciu brutu , your ; now your , metellu ; 
 your , cinna ; and , my valiant casca , your ; 
 though last , not least in love , your , good treboniu . 
 gentlemen all- ala , what shall i say ? 
 my credit now stand on such slipperi ground , 
 that one of two bad way you must conceit me , 
 either a coward or a flatter . 
 that i did love thee , caesar , o , 't is true ! 
 if then thi spirit look upon us now , 
 shall it not griev thee dearer than thi death 
 to see thi antoni make hi peac , 
 shake the bloodi finger of thi foe , 
 most nobl ! in the presenc of thi cors ? 
 had i as mani eye as thou hast wound , 
 weep as fast as they stream forth thi blood , 
 it would becom me better than to close 
 in term of friendship with thine enemi . 
 pardon me , juliu ! here wast thou bay 'd , brave hart , 
 here didst thou fall , and here thi hunter stand , 
 sign 'd in thi spoil , and crimson 'd in thi leth . 
 o world , thou wast the forest to thi hart , 
 and thi , inde , o world , the heart of thee . 
 how like a deer strucken by mani princ 
 dost thou here lie ! 
 cassiu . mark antony- 
 antoni . pardon me , caiu cassiu . 
 the enemi of caesar shall say thi : 
 then , in a friend , it is cold modesti . 
 cassiu . i blame you not for prais caesar so ; 
 but what compact mean you to have with us ? 
 will you be prick 'd in number of our friend , 
 or shall we on , and not depend on you ? 
 antoni . therefor i took your hand , but wa inde 
 sway 'd from the point by look down on caesar . 
 friend am i with you all and love you all , 
 upon thi hope that you shall give me reason 
 whi and wherein caesar wa danger . 
 brutu . or els were thi a savag spectacl . 
 our reason are so full of good regard 
 that were you , antoni , the son of caesar , 
 you should be satisfi . 
 antoni . that 's all i seek ; 
 and am moreov suitor that i may 
 produc hi bodi to the marketplac , 
 and in the pulpit , as becom a friend , 
 speak in the order of hi funer . 
 brutu . you shall , mark antoni . 
 cassiu . brutu , a word with you . 
 [ asid to brutu . ] you know not what you do . do not consent 
 that antoni speak in hi funer . 
 know you how much the peopl may be move 
 by that which he will utter ? 
 brutu . by your pardon , 
 i will myself into the pulpit first , 
 and show the reason of our caesar 's death . 
 what antoni shall speak , i will protest 
 he speak by leav and by permiss , 
 and that we are content caesar shall 
 have all true rite and law ceremoni . 
 it shall advantag more than do us wrong . 
 cassiu . i know not what may fall ; i like it not . 
 brutu . mark antoni , here , take you caesar 's bodi . 
 you shall not in your funer speech blame us , 
 but speak all good you can devis of caesar , 
 and say you do't by our permiss , 
 els shall you not have ani hand at all 
 about hi funer . and you shall speak 
 in the same pulpit whereto i am go , 
 after my speech is end . 
 antoni . be it so , 
 i do desir no more . 
 brutu . prepar the bodi then , and follow us . 
 exeunt all but antoni . 
 antoni . o , pardon me , thou bleed piec of earth , 
 that i am meek and gentl with these butcher ! 
 thou art the ruin of the noblest man 
 that ever live in the tide of time . 
 woe to the hand that shed thi costli blood ! 
 over thi wound now do i prophesi 
 ( which like dumb mouth do ope their rubi lip 
 to beg the voic and utter of my tongu ) 
 a curs shall light upon the limb of men ; 
 domest furi and fierc civil strife 
 shall cumber all the part of itali ; 
 blood and destruct shall be so in use , 
 and dread object so familiar , 
 that mother shall but smile when they behold 
 their infant quarter 'd with the hand of war ; 
 all piti choke with custom of fell deed , 
 and caesar 's spirit rang for reveng , 
 with ate by hi side come hot from hell , 
 shall in these confin with a monarch 's voic 
 cri `` havoc ! '' and let slip the dog of war , 
 that thi foul deed shall smell abov the earth 
 with carrion men , groan for burial . 
 
 enter a servant . 
 
 you serv octaviu caesar , do you not ? 
 servant . i do , mark antoni . 
 antoni . caesar did write for him to come to rome . 
 servant . he did receiv hi letter , and is come , 
 and bid me say to you by word of mouth- 
 o caesar ! see the bodi . 
 antoni . thi heart is big ; get thee apart and weep . 
 passion , i see , is catch , for mine eye , 
 see those bead of sorrow stand in thine , 
 began to water . is thi master come ? 
 servant . he lie tonight within seven leagu of rome . 
 antoni . post back with speed and tell him what hath chanc . 
 here is a mourn rome , a danger rome , 
 no rome of safeti for octaviu yet ; 
 hie henc , and tell him so . yet stay awhil , 
 thou shalt not back till i have born thi cors 
 into the marketplac . there shall i tri , 
 in my orat , how the peopl take 
 the cruel issu of these bloodi men , 
 accord to the which thou shalt discours 
 to young octaviu of the state of thing . 
 lend me your hand . exeunt with caesar 's bodi . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the forum . 
 
 enter brutu and cassiu , and a throng of citizen . 
 
 citizen . we will be satisfi ! let us be satisfi ! 
 brutu . then follow me and give me audienc , friend . 
 cassiu , go you into the other street 
 and part the number . 
 those that will hear me speak , let 'em stay here ; 
 those that will follow cassiu , go with him ; 
 and public reason shall be render 
 of caesar 's death . 
 first citizen . i will hear brutu speak . 
 second citizen . i will hear cassiu and compar their reason , 
 when sever we hear them render . 
 exit cassiu , with some citizen . 
 brutu goe into the pulpit . 
 third citizen . the nobl brutu is ascend . silenc ! 
 brutu . be patient till the last . 
 roman , countrymen , and lover ! hear me for my caus , and be 
 silent , that you may hear . believ me for mine honor , and have 
 respect to mine honor , that you may believ . censur me in your 
 wisdom , and awak your sens , that you may the better judg . if 
 there be ani in thi assembl , ani dear friend of caesar 's , to 
 him i say that brutu ' love to caesar wa no less than hi . if 
 then that friend demand whi brutu rose against caesar , thi is 
 my answer : not that i love caesar less , but that i love rome 
 more . had you rather caesar were live and die all slave , than 
 that caesar were dead to live all freemen ? as caesar love me , i 
 weep for him ; as he wa fortun , i rejoic at it ; as he wa 
 valiant , i honor him ; but as he wa ambiti , i slew him . there 
 is tear for hi love , joy for hi fortun , honor for hi valor , 
 and death for hi ambit . who is here so base that would be a 
 bondman ? if ani , speak , for him have i offend . who is here so 
 rude that would not be a roman ? if ani , speak , for him have i 
 offend . who is here so vile that will not love hi countri ? if 
 ani , speak , for him have i offend . i paus for a repli . 
 all . none , brutu , none . 
 brutu . then none have i offend . i have done no more to caesar 
 than you shall do to brutu . the question of hi death is 
 enrol in the capitol , hi glori not extenu , wherein he wa 
 worthi , nor hi offens enforc , for which he suffer death . 
 
 enter antoni and other , with caesar 's bodi . 
 
 here come hi bodi , mourn by mark antoni , who , though he had 
 no hand in hi death , shall receiv the benefit of hi die , a 
 place in the commonwealth , as which of you shall not ? with thi i 
 depart- that , as i slew my best lover for the good of rome , i 
 have the same dagger for myself , when it shall pleas my countri 
 to need my death . 
 all . live , brutu , live , live ! 
 first citizen . bring him with triumph home unto hi hous . 
 second citizen . give him a statu with hi ancestor . 
 third citizen . let him be caesar . 
 fourth citizen . caesar 's better part 
 shall be crown 'd in brutu . 
 first citizen . we 'll bring him to hi hous with shout and 
 clamor . 
 brutu . my countrymen- 
 second citizen . peac ! silenc ! brutu speak . 
 first citizen . peac , ho ! 
 brutu . good countrymen , let me depart alon , 
 and , for my sake , stay here with antoni . 
 do grace to caesar 's cors , and grace hi speech 
 tend to caesar 's glori , which mark antoni , 
 by our permiss , is allow 'd to make . 
 i do entreat you , not a man depart , 
 save i alon , till antoni have spoke . exit . 
 first citizen . stay , ho , and let us hear mark antoni . 
 third citizen . let him go up into the public chair ; 
 we 'll hear him . nobl antoni , go up . 
 antoni . for brutu ' sake , i am behold to you . 
 goe into the pulpit . 
 fourth citizen . what doe he say of brutu ? 
 third citizen . he say , for brutu ' sake , 
 he find himself behold to us all . 
 fourth citizen . 'twere best he speak no harm of brutu here . 
 first citizen . thi caesar wa a tyrant . 
 third citizen . nay , that 's certain . 
 we are blest that rome is rid of him . 
 second citizen . peac ! let us hear what antoni can say . 
 antoni . you gentl romans- 
 all . peac , ho ! let us hear him . 
 antoni . friend , roman , countrymen , lend me your ear ! 
 i come to buri caesar , not to prais him . 
 the evil that men do live after them , 
 the good is oft inter with their bone ; 
 so let it be with caesar . the nobl brutu 
 hath told you caesar wa ambiti ; 
 if it were so , it wa a grievou fault , 
 and grievous hath caesar answer 'd it . 
 here , under leav of brutu and the rest- 
 for brutu is an honor man ; 
 so are they all , all honor men- 
 come i to speak in caesar 's funer . 
 he wa my friend , faith and just to me ; 
 but brutu say he wa ambiti , 
 and brutu is an honor man . 
 he hath brought mani captiv home to rome , 
 whose ransom did the gener coffer fill . 
 did thi in caesar seem ambiti ? 
 when that the poor have cri , caesar hath wept ; 
 ambit should be made of sterner stuff : 
 yet brutu say he wa ambiti , 
 and brutu is an honor man . 
 you all did see that on the luperc 
 i thrice present him a kingli crown , 
 which he did thrice refus . wa thi ambit ? 
 yet brutu say he wa ambiti , 
 and sure he is an honor man . 
 i speak not to disprov what brutu spoke , 
 but here i am to speak what i do know . 
 you all did love him onc , not without caus ; 
 what caus withhold you then to mourn for him ? 
 o judgement , thou art fled to brutish beast , 
 and men have lost their reason . bear with me ; 
 my heart is in the coffin there with caesar , 
 and i must paus till it come back to me . 
 first citizen . methink there is much reason in hi say . 
 second citizen . if thou consid rightli of the matter , 
 caesar ha had great wrong . 
 third citizen . ha he , master ? 
 i fear there will a wors come in hi place . 
 fourth citizen . mark 'd ye hi word ? he would not take the crown ; 
 therefor 't is certain he wa not ambiti . 
 first citizen . if it be found so , some will dear abid it . 
 second citizen . poor soul , hi eye are red as fire with weep . 
 third citizen . there 's not a nobler man in rome than antoni . 
 fourth citizen . now mark him , he begin again to speak . 
 antoni . but yesterday the word of caesar might 
 have stood against the world . now lie he there , 
 and none so poor to do him rever . 
 o master ! if i were dispos to stir 
 your heart and mind to mutini and rage , 
 i should do brutu wrong and cassiu wrong , 
 who , you all know , are honor men . 
 i will not do them wrong ; i rather choos 
 to wrong the dead , to wrong myself and you , 
 than i will wrong such honor men . 
 but here 's a parchment with the seal of caesar ; 
 i found it in hi closet , 't is hi will . 
 let but the common hear thi testament- 
 which , pardon me , i do not mean to read- 
 and they would go and kiss dead caesar 's wound 
 and dip their napkin in hi sacr blood , 
 yea , beg a hair of him for memori , 
 and , die , mention it within their will , 
 bequeath it as a rich legaci 
 unto their issu . 
 fourth citizen . we 'll hear the will . read it , mark antoni . 
 all . the will , the will ! we will hear caesar 's will . 
 antoni . have patienc , gentl friend , i must not read it ; 
 it is not meet you know how caesar love you . 
 you are not wood , you are not stone , but men ; 
 and , be men , hear the will of caesar , 
 it will inflam you , it will make you mad . 
 't is good you know not that you are hi heir , 
 for if you should , o , what would come of it ! 
 fourth citizen . read the will ; we 'll hear it , antoni . 
 you shall read us the will , caesar 's will . 
 antoni . will you be patient ? will you stay awhil ? 
 i have o'ershot myself to tell you of it . 
 i fear i wrong the honor men 
 whose dagger have stabb 'd caesar ; i do fear it . 
 fourth citizen . they were traitor . honor men ! 
 all . the will ! the testament ! 
 second citizen . they were villain , murther . the will ! 
 read the will ! 
 antoni . you will compel me then to read the will ? 
 then make a ring about the cors of caesar , 
 and let me show you him that made the will . 
 shall i descend ? and will you give me leav ? 
 all . come down . 
 second citizen . descend . 
 he come down from the pulpit . 
 third citizen . you shall have leav . 
 fourth citizen . a ring , stand round . 
 first citizen . stand from the hears , stand from the bodi . 
 second citizen . room for antoni , most nobl antoni . 
 antoni . nay , press not so upon me , stand far off . 
 all . stand back ; room , bear back ! 
 antoni . if you have tear , prepar to shed them now . 
 you all do know thi mantl . i rememb 
 the first time ever caesar put it on ; 
 't wa on a summer 's even , in hi tent , 
 that day he overcam the nervii . 
 look , in thi place ran cassiu ' dagger through ; 
 see what a rent the enviou casca made ; 
 through thi the well-belov brutu stabb 'd ; 
 and as he pluck 'd hi curs steel away , 
 mark how the blood of caesar follow 'd it , 
 as rush out of door , to be resolv 
 if brutu so unkindli knock 'd , or no ; 
 for brutu , as you know , wa caesar 's angel . 
 judg , o you god , how dearli caesar love him ! 
 thi wa the most unkindest cut of all ; 
 for when the nobl caesar saw him stab , 
 ingratitud , more strong than traitor ' arm , 
 quit vanquish 'd him . then burst hi mighti heart , 
 and , in hi mantl muffl up hi face , 
 even at the base of pompey 's statu , 
 which all the while ran blood , great caesar fell . 
 o , what a fall wa there , my countrymen ! 
 then i , and you , and all of us fell down , 
 whilst bloodi treason flourish 'd over us . 
 o , now you weep , and i perceiv you feel 
 the dint of piti . these are graciou drop . 
 kind soul , what weep you when you but behold 
 our caesar 's vestur wound ? look you here , 
 here is himself , marr 'd , as you see , with traitor . 
 first citizen . o piteou spectacl ! 
 second citizen . o nobl caesar ! 
 third citizen . o woeful day ! 
 fourth citizen . o traitor villain ! 
 first citizen . o most bloodi sight ! 
 second citizen . we will be reveng . 
 all . reveng ! about ! seek ! burn ! fire ! kill ! 
 slay ! let not a traitor live ! 
 antoni . stay , countrymen . 
 first citizen . peac there ! hear the nobl antoni . 
 second citizen . we 'll hear him , we 'll follow him , we 'll die with 
 him . 
 antoni . good friend , sweet friend , let me not stir you up 
 to such a sudden flood of mutini . 
 they that have done thi deed are honor . 
 what privat grief they have , ala , i know not , 
 that made them do it . they are wise and honor , 
 and will , no doubt , with reason answer you . 
 i come not , friend , to steal away your heart . 
 i am no orat , as brutu is ; 
 but , as you know me all , a plain blunt man , 
 that love my friend , and that they know full well 
 that gave me public leav to speak of him . 
 for i have neither wit , nor word , nor worth , 
 action , nor utter , nor the power of speech , 
 to stir men 's blood . i onli speak right on ; 
 i tell you that which you yourselv do know ; 
 show you sweet caesar 's wound , poor dumb mouth , 
 and bid them speak for me . but were i brutu , 
 and brutu antoni , there were an antoni 
 would ruffl up your spirit and put a tongu 
 in everi wound of caesar that should move 
 the stone of rome to rise and mutini . 
 all . we 'll mutini . 
 first citizen . we 'll burn the hous of brutu . 
 third citizen . away , then ! come , seek the conspir . 
 antoni . yet hear me , countrymen ; yet hear me speak . 
 all . peac , ho ! hear antoni , most nobl antoni ! 
 antoni . whi , friend , you go to do you know not what . 
 wherein hath caesar thu deserv your love ? 
 ala , you know not ; i must tell you then . 
 you have forgot the will i told you of . 
 all . most true , the will ! let 's stay and hear the will . 
 antoni . here is the will , and under caesar 's seal . 
 to everi roman citizen he give , 
 to everi sever man , seventy-f drachma . 
 second citizen . most nobl caesar ! we 'll reveng hi death . 
 third citizen . o royal caesar ! 
 antoni . hear me with patienc . 
 all . peac , ho ! 
 antoni . moreov , he hath left you all hi walk , 
 hi privat arbor , and new-plant orchard , 
 on thi side tiber ; he hath left them you , 
 and to your heir forever- common pleasur , 
 to walk abroad and recreat yourselv . 
 here wa a caesar ! when come such anoth ? 
 first citizen . never , never . come , away , away ! 
 we 'll burn hi bodi in the holi place 
 and with the brand fire the traitor ' hous . 
 take up the bodi . 
 second citizen . go fetch fire . 
 third citizen . pluck down bench . 
 fourth citizen . pluck down form , window , anyth . 
 exeunt citizen with the bodi . 
 antoni . now let it work . mischief , thou art afoot , 
 take thou what cours thou wilt . 
 
 enter a servant . 
 
 how now , fellow ? 
 servant . sir , octaviu is alreadi come to rome . 
 antoni . where is he ? 
 servant . he and lepidu are at caesar 's hous . 
 antoni . and thither will i straight to visit him . 
 he come upon a wish . fortun is merri , 
 and in thi mood will give us anyth . 
 servant . i heard him say brutu and cassiu 
 are rid like madmen through the gate of rome . 
 antoni . be like they had some notic of the peopl , 
 how i had move them . bring me to octaviu . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a street . 
 
 enter cinna the poet . 
 
 cinna . i dreamt tonight that i did feast with caesar , 
 and thing unluckili charg my fantasi . 
 i have no will to wander forth of door , 
 yet someth lead me forth . 
 
 enter citizen . 
 
 first citizen . what is your name ? 
 second citizen . whither are you go ? 
 third citizen . where do you dwell ? 
 fourth citizen . are you a marri man or a bachelor ? 
 second citizen . answer everi man directli . 
 first citizen . ay , and briefli . 
 fourth citizen . ay , and wise . 
 third citizen . ay , and truli , you were best . 
 cinna . what is my name ? whither am i go ? where do i dwell ? am i 
 a marri man or a bachelor ? then , to answer everi man directli 
 and briefli , wise and truli : wise i say , i am a bachelor . 
 second citizen . that 's as much as to say they are fool that marri . 
 you 'll bear me a bang for that , i fear . proceed directli . 
 cinna . directli , i am go to caesar 's funer . 
 first citizen . as a friend or an enemi ? 
 cinna . as a friend . 
 second citizen . that matter is answer directli . 
 fourth citizen . for your dwell , briefli . 
 cinna . briefli , i dwell by the capitol . 
 third citizen . your name , sir , truli . 
 cinna . truli , my name is cinna . 
 first citizen . tear him to piec , he 's a conspir . 
 cinna . i am cinna the poet , i am cinna the poet . 
 fourth citizen . tear him for hi bad vers , tear him for hi bad 
 vers . 
 cinna . i am not cinna the conspir . 
 fourth citizen . it is no matter , hi name 's cinna . pluck but hi 
 name out of hi heart , and turn him go . 
 third citizen . tear him , tear him ! come , brand , ho , firebrand . to 
 brutu ' , to cassiu ' ; burn all . some to deciu ' hous , and some 
 to casca 's , some to ligariu ' . away , go ! exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 a hous in rome . antoni , octaviu , and lepidu , seat at a tabl . 
 
 antoni . these mani then shall die , their name are prick 'd . 
 octaviu . your brother too must die ; consent you , lepidu ? 
 lepidu . i do consent- 
 octaviu . prick him down , antoni . 
 lepidu . upon condit publiu shall not live , 
 who is your sister 's son , mark antoni . 
 antoni . he shall not live ; look , with a spot i damn him . 
 but , lepidu , go you to caesar 's hous , 
 fetch the will hither , and we shall determin 
 how to cut off some charg in legaci . 
 lepidu . what , shall i find you here ? 
 octaviu . or here , or at the capitol . exit lepidu . 
 antoni . thi is a slight unmerit man , 
 meet to be sent on errand . is it fit , 
 the three-fold world divid , he should stand 
 one of the three to share it ? 
 octaviu . so you thought him , 
 and took hi voic who should be prick 'd to die 
 in our black sentenc and proscript . 
 antoni . octaviu , i have seen more day than you , 
 and though we lay these honor on thi man 
 to eas ourselv of diver slander load , 
 he shall but bear them as the ass bear gold , 
 to groan and sweat under the busi , 
 either led or driven , as we point the way ; 
 and have brought our treasur where we will , 
 then take we down hi load and turn him off , 
 like to the empti ass , to shake hi ear 
 and graze in common . 
 octaviu . you may do your will , 
 but he 's a tri and valiant soldier . 
 antoni . so is my hors , octaviu , and for that 
 i do appoint him store of provend . 
 it is a creatur that i teach to fight , 
 to wind , to stop , to run directli on , 
 hi corpor motion govern 'd by my spirit . 
 and , in some tast , is lepidu but so : 
 he must be taught , and train 'd , and bid go forth ; 
 a barren-spirit fellow , one that feed 
 on object , art , and imit , 
 which , out of use and stale by other men , 
 begin hi fashion . do not talk of him 
 but as a properti . and now , octaviu , 
 listen great thing . brutu and cassiu 
 are levi power ; we must straight make head ; 
 therefor let our allianc be combin , 
 our best friend made , our mean stretch 'd ; 
 and let us present go sit in council , 
 how covert matter may be best disclos , 
 and open peril surest answer . 
 octaviu . let us do so , for we are at the stake , 
 and bay 'd about with mani enemi ; 
 and some that smile have in their heart , i fear , 
 million of mischief . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 camp near sardi . befor brutu ' tent . drum . 
 
 enter brutu , luciliu , luciu , and soldier ; titiniu and pindaru meet them . 
 
 brutu . stand , ho ! 
 luciliu . give the word , ho , and stand . 
 brutu . what now , luciliu , is cassiu near ? 
 luciliu . he is at hand , and pindaru is come 
 to do you salut from hi master . 
 brutu . he greet me well . your master , pindaru , 
 in hi own chang , or by ill offic , 
 hath given me some worthi caus to wish 
 thing done undon ; but if he be at hand , 
 i shall be satisfi . 
 pindaru . i do not doubt 
 but that my nobl master will appear 
 such as he is , full of regard and honor . 
 brutu . he is not doubt . a word , luciliu , 
 how he receiv you . let me be resolv . 
 luciliu . with courtesi and with respect enough , 
 but not with such familiar instanc , 
 nor with such free and friendli confer , 
 as he hath use of old . 
 brutu . thou hast describ 
 a hot friend cool . ever note , luciliu , 
 when love begin to sicken and decay 
 it useth an enforc ceremoni . 
 there are no trick in plain and simpl faith ; 
 but hollow men , like hors hot at hand , 
 make gallant show and promis of their mettl ; 
 but when they should endur the bloodi spur , 
 they fall their crest and like deceit jade 
 sink in the trial . come hi armi on ? 
 luciliu . they meant hi night in sard is to be quarter 'd ; 
 the greater part , the hors in gener , 
 are come with cassiu . low march within . 
 brutu . hark , he is arriv . 
 march gentli on to meet him . 
 
 enter cassiu and hi power . 
 
 cassiu . stand , ho ! 
 brutu . stand , ho ! speak the word along . 
 first soldier . stand ! 
 second soldier . stand ! 
 third soldier . stand ! 
 cassiu . most nobl brother , you have done me wrong . 
 brutu . judg me , you god ! wrong i mine enemi ? 
 and , if not so , how should i wrong a brother ? 
 cassiu . brutu , thi sober form of your hide wrong , 
 and when you do them- 
 brutu . cassiu , be content , 
 speak your grief softli , i do know you well . 
 befor the eye of both our armi here , 
 which should perceiv noth but love from us , 
 let us not wrangl . bid them move away ; 
 then in my tent , cassiu , enlarg your grief , 
 and i will give you audienc . 
 cassiu . pindaru , 
 bid our command lead their charg off 
 a littl from thi ground . 
 brutu . luciliu , do you the like , and let no man 
 come to our tent till we have done our confer . 
 let luciu and titiniu guard our door . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 brutu ' tent . 
 
 enter brutu and cassiu . 
 
 cassiu . that you have wrong 'd me doth appear in thi : 
 you have condemn 'd and note luciu pella 
 for take bribe here of the sardian , 
 wherein my letter , pray on hi side , 
 becaus i knew the man , were slight off . 
 brutu . you wrong 'd yourself to write in such a case . 
 cassiu . in such a time as thi it is not meet 
 that everi nice offens should bear hi comment . 
 brutu . let me tell you , cassiu , you yourself 
 are much condemn 'd to have an itch palm , 
 to sell and mart your offic for gold 
 to undeserv . 
 cassiu . i an itch palm ? 
 you know that you are brutu that speak thi , 
 or , by the god , thi speech were els your last . 
 brutu . the name of cassiu honor thi corrupt , 
 and chastis doth therefor hide hi head . 
 cassiu . chastis ? 
 brutu . rememb march , the ide of march rememb . 
 did not great juliu bleed for justic ' sake ? 
 what villain touch 'd hi bodi , that did stab , 
 and not for justic ? what , shall one of us , 
 that struck the foremost man of all thi world 
 but for support robber , shall we now 
 contamin our finger with base bribe 
 and sell the mighti space of our larg honor 
 for so much trash as may be grasp thu ? 
 i had rather be a dog , and bay the moon , 
 than such a roman . 
 cassiu . brutu , bait not me , 
 i 'll not endur it . you forget yourself 
 to hedg me in . i am a soldier , i , 
 older in practic , abler than yourself 
 to make condit . 
 brutu . go to , you are not , cassiu . 
 cassiu . i am . 
 brutu . i say you are not . 
 cassiu . urg me no more , i shall forget myself ; 
 have mind upon your health , tempt me no farther . 
 brutu . away , slight man ! 
 cassiu . is't possibl ? 
 brutu . hear me , for i will speak . 
 must i give way and room to your rash choler ? 
 shall i be fright when a madman stare ? 
 cassiu . o god , ye god ! must i endur all thi ? 
 brutu . all thi ? ay , more . fret till your proud heart break . 
 go show your slave how choler you are , 
 and make your bondmen trembl . must i boug ? 
 must i observ you ? must i stand and crouch 
 under your testi humor ? by the god , 
 you shall digest the venom of your spleen , 
 though it do split you , for , from thi day forth , 
 i 'll use you for my mirth , yea , for my laughter , 
 when you are waspish . 
 cassiu . is it come to thi ? 
 brutu . you say you are a better soldier : 
 let it appear so , make your vaunt true , 
 and it shall pleas me well . for mine own part , 
 i shall be glad to learn of nobl men . 
 cassiu . you wrong me everi way , you wrong me , brutu . 
 i said , an elder soldier , not a better . 
 did i say `` better '' ? 
 brutu . if you did , i care not . 
 cassiu . when caesar live , he durst not thu have move me . 
 brutu . peac , peac ! you durst not so have tempt him . 
 cassiu . i durst not ? 
 brutu . no . 
 cassiu . what , durst not tempt him ? 
 brutu . for your life you durst not . 
 cassiu . do not presum too much upon my love ; 
 i may do that i shall be sorri for . 
 brutu . you have done that you should be sorri for . 
 there is no terror , cassiu , in your threat , 
 for i am arm 'd so strong in honesti , 
 that they pass by me as the idl wind 
 which i respect not . i did send to you 
 for certain sum of gold , which you deni me , 
 for i can rais no money by vile mean . 
 by heaven , i had rather coin my heart 
 and drop my blood for drachma than to wring 
 from the hard hand of peasant their vile trash 
 by ani indirect . i did send 
 to you for gold to pay my legion , 
 which you deni me . wa that done like cassiu ? 
 should i have answer 'd caiu cassiu so ? 
 when marcu brutu grow so covet 
 to lock such rascal counter from hi friend , 
 be readi , god , with all your thunderbolt , 
 dash him to piec ! 
 cassiu . i deni you not . 
 brutu . you did . 
 cassiu . i did not . he wa but a fool 
 that brought my answer back . brutu hath rive my heart . 
 a friend should bear hi friend 's infirm , 
 but brutu make mine greater than they are . 
 brutu . i do not , till you practis them on me . 
 cassiu . you love me not . 
 brutu . i do not like your fault . 
 cassiu . a friendli eye could never see such fault . 
 brutu . a flatter 's would not , though they do appear 
 as huge as high olympu . 
 cassiu . come , antoni , and young octaviu , come , 
 reveng yourselv alon on cassiu , 
 for cassiu is aweari of the world : 
 hate by one he love ; brave by hi brother ; 
 check 'd like a bondman ; all hi fault observ , 
 set in a notebook , learn 'd and conn 'd by rote , 
 to cast into my teeth . o , i could weep 
 my spirit from mine eye ! there is my dagger , 
 and here my nake breast ; within , a heart 
 dearer than pluto 's mine , richer than gold . 
 if that thou best a roman , take it forth ; 
 i , that deni thee gold , will give my heart . 
 strike , as thou didst at caesar , for i know , 
 when thou didst hate him worst , thou lovedst him better 
 than ever thou lovedst cassiu . 
 brutu . sheath your dagger . 
 be angri when you will , it shall have scope ; 
 do what you will , dishonor shall be humor . 
 o cassiu , you are yoke with a lamb , 
 that carri anger as the flint bear fire , 
 who , much enforc , show a hasti spark 
 and straight is cold again . 
 cassiu . hath cassiu live 
 to be but mirth and laughter to hi brutu , 
 when grief and blood ill-temp 'd vexeth him ? 
 brutu . when i spoke that , i wa ill-temp 'd too . 
 cassiu . do you confess so much ? give me your hand . 
 brutu . and my heart too . 
 cassiu . o brutu ! 
 brutu . what 's the matter ? 
 cassiu . have not you love enough to bear with me 
 when that rash humor which my mother gave me 
 make me forget ? 
 brutu . ye , cassiu , and from henceforth , 
 when you are overearnest with your brutu , 
 he 'll think your mother chide , and leav you so . 
 poet . [ within . ] let me go in to see the gener . 
 there is some grudg between 'em , 't is not meet 
 they be alon . 
 luciliu . [ within . ] you shall not come to them . 
 poet . [ within . ] noth but death shall stay me . 
 
 enter poet , follow by luciliu , titiniu , and luciu . 
 
 cassiu . how now , what 's the matter ? 
 poet . for shame , you gener ! what do you mean ? 
 love , and be friend , as two such men should be ; 
 for i have seen more year , i 'm sure , than ye . 
 cassiu . ha , ha ! how vile doth thi cynic rhyme ! 
 brutu . get you henc , sirrah ; sauci fellow , henc ! 
 cassiu . bear with him , brutu ; 't is hi fashion . 
 brutu . i 'll know hi humor when he know hi time . 
 what should the war do with these jig fool ? 
 companion , henc ! 
 cassiu . away , away , be gone ! exit poet . 
 brutu . luciliu and titiniu , bid the command 
 prepar to lodg their compani tonight . 
 cassiu . and come yourselv and bring messala with you 
 immedi to us . exeunt luciliu and titiniu . 
 brutu . luciu , a bowl of wine ! exit luciu . 
 cassiu . i did not think you could have been so angri . 
 brutu . o cassiu , i am sick of mani grief . 
 cassiu . of your philosophi you make no use , 
 if you give place to accident evil . 
 brutu . no man bear sorrow better . portia is dead . 
 cassiu . ha ? portia ? 
 brutu . she is dead . 
 cassiu . how 'scape kill when i cross 'd you so ? 
 o insupport and touch loss ! 
 upon what sick ? 
 brutu . impati of my absenc , 
 and grief that young octaviu with mark antoni 
 have made themselv so strong- for with her death 
 that tide came- with thi she fell distract , 
 and ( her attend absent ) swallow 'd fire . 
 cassiu . and die so ? 
 brutu . even so . 
 cassiu . o ye immort god ! 
 
 re-ent luciu , with wine and taper . 
 
 brutu . speak no more of her . give me a bowl of wine . 
 in thi i buri all unkind , cassiu . drink . 
 cassiu . my heart is thirsti for that nobl pledg . 
 fill , luciu , till the wine o'erswel the cup ; 
 i can not drink too much of brutu ' love . drink . 
 brutu . come in , titiniu ! exit luciu . 
 
 re-ent titiniu , with messala . 
 
 welcom , good messala . 
 now sit we close about thi taper here , 
 and call in question our necess . 
 cassiu . portia , art thou gone ? 
 brutu . no more , i pray you . 
 messala , i have here receiv letter 
 that young octaviu and mark antoni 
 come down upon us with a mighti power , 
 bend their expedit toward philippi . 
 messala . myself have letter of the selfsam tenur . 
 brutu . with what addit ? 
 messala . that by proscript and bill of outlawri 
 octaviu , antoni , and lepidu 
 have put to death an hundr senat . 
 brutu . there in our letter do not well agre ; 
 mine speak of seventi senat that die 
 by their proscript , cicero be one . 
 cassiu . cicero one ! 
 messala . cicero is dead , 
 and by that order of proscript . 
 had you your letter from your wife , my lord ? 
 brutu . no , messala . 
 messala . nor noth in your letter writ of her ? 
 brutu . noth , messala . 
 messala . that , methink , is strang . 
 brutu . whi ask you ? hear you aught of her in your ? 
 messala . no , my lord . 
 brutu . now , as you are a roman , tell me true . 
 messala . then like a roman bear the truth i tell : 
 for certain she is dead , and by strang manner . 
 brutu . whi , farewel , portia . we must die , messala . 
 with medit that she must die onc 
 i have the patienc to endur it now . 
 messala . even so great men great loss should endur . 
 cassiu . i have as much of thi in art as you , 
 but yet my natur could not bear it so . 
 brutu . well , to our work aliv . what do you think 
 of march to philippi present ? 
 cassiu . i do not think it good . 
 brutu . your reason ? 
 cassiu . thi it is : 
 't is better that the enemi seek us ; 
 so shall he wast hi mean , weari hi soldier , 
 do himself offens , whilst we lie still 
 are full of rest , defens , and nimbl . 
 brutu . good reason must of forc give place to better . 
 the peopl 'twixt philippi and thi ground 
 do stand but in a forc affect , 
 for they have grudg us contribut . 
 the enemi , march along by them , 
 by them shall make a fuller number up , 
 come on refresh 'd , new-ad , and encourag ; 
 from which advantag shall we cut him off 
 if at philippi we do face him there , 
 these peopl at our back . 
 cassiu . hear me , good brother . 
 brutu . under your pardon . you must note besid 
 that we have tri the utmost of our friend , 
 our legion are brim-ful , our caus is ripe : 
 the enemi increaseth everi day ; 
 we , at the height , are readi to declin . 
 there is a tide in the affair of men 
 which taken at the flood lead on to fortun ; 
 omit , all the voyag of their life 
 is bound in shallow and in miseri . 
 on such a full sea are we now afloat , 
 and we must take the current when it serv , 
 or lose our ventur . 
 cassiu . then , with your will , go on ; 
 we 'll along ourselv and meet them at philippi . 
 brutu . the deep of night is crept upon our talk , 
 and natur must obey necess , 
 which we will niggard with a littl rest . 
 there is no more to say ? 
 cassiu . no more . good night . 
 earli tomorrow will we rise and henc . 
 brutu . luciu ! 
 
 re-ent luciu . 
 
 my gown . exit luciu . 
 farewel , good messala ; 
 good night , titiniu ; nobl , nobl cassiu , 
 good night and good repos . 
 cassiu . o my dear brother ! 
 thi wa an ill begin of the night . 
 never come such divis 'tween our soul ! 
 let it not , brutu . 
 brutu . everyth is well . 
 cassiu . good night , my lord . 
 brutu . good night , good brother . 
 titiniu . messala . good night , lord brutu . 
 brutu . farewel , everyon . 
 exeunt all but brutu . 
 
 re-ent luciu , with the gown . 
 
 give me the gown . where is thi instrument ? 
 luciu . here in the tent . 
 brutu . what , thou speak'st drowsili ? 
 poor knave , i blame thee not , thou art o'erwatch 'd . 
 call claudio and some other of my men , 
 i 'll have them sleep on cushion in my tent . 
 luciu . varro and claudio ! 
 
 enter varro and claudio . 
 
 varro . call my lord ? 
 brutu . i pray you , sir , lie in my tent and sleep ; 
 it may be i shall rais you by and by 
 on busi to my brother cassiu . 
 varro . so pleas you , we will stand and watch your pleasur . 
 brutu . i would not have it so . lie down , good sir . 
 it may be i shall otherwis bethink me . 
 look luciu , here 's the book i sought for so ; 
 i put it in the pocket of my gown . 
 varro and claudio lie down . 
 luciu . i wa sure your lordship did not give it me . 
 brutu . bear with me , good boy , i am much forget . 
 canst thou hold up thi heavi eye awhil , 
 and touch thi instrument a strain or two ? 
 luciu . ay , my lord , a n't pleas you . 
 brutu . it doe , my boy . 
 i troubl thee too much , but thou art will . 
 luciu . it is my duti , sir . 
 brutu . i should not urg thi duti past thi might ; 
 i know young blood look for a time of rest . 
 luciu . i have slept , my lord , alreadi . 
 brutu . it wa well done , and thou shalt sleep again ; 
 i will not hold thee long . if i do live , 
 i will be good to thee . music , and a song . 
 thi is a sleepi tune . o murther slumber , 
 layest thou thi leaden mace upon my boy 
 that play thee music ? gentl knave , good night . 
 i will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee . 
 if thou dost nod , thou break'st thi instrument ; 
 i 'll take it from thee ; and , good boy , good night . 
 let me see , let me see ; is not the leaf turn 'd down 
 where i left read ? here it is , i think . sit down . 
 
 enter the ghost of caesar . 
 
 how ill thi taper burn ! ha , who come here ? 
 i think it is the weak of mine eye 
 that shape thi monstrou apparit . 
 it come upon me . art thou anyth ? 
 art thou some god , some angel , or some devil 
 that makest my blood cold and my hair to stare ? 
 speak to me what thou art . 
 ghost . thi evil spirit , brutu . 
 brutu . whi comest thou ? 
 ghost . to tell thee thou shalt see me at philippi . 
 brutu . well , then i shall see thee again ? 
 ghost . ay , at philippi . 
 brutu . whi , i will see thee at philippi then . exit ghost . 
 now i have taken heart thou vanishest . 
 ill spirit , i would hold more talk with thee . 
 boy ! luciu ! varro ! claudio ! sir , awak ! 
 claudio ! 
 luciu . the string , my lord , are fals . 
 brutu . he think he still is at hi instrument . 
 luciu , awak ! 
 luciu . my lord ? 
 brutu . didst thou dream , luciu , that thou so criedst out ? 
 luciu . my lord , i do not know that i did cri . 
 brutu . ye , that thou didst . didst thou see anyth ? 
 luciu . noth , my lord . 
 brutu . sleep again , luciu . sirrah claudio ! 
 [ to varro . ] fellow thou , awak ! 
 varro . my lord ? 
 claudio . my lord ? 
 brutu . whi did you so cri out , sir , in your sleep ? 
 varro . claudio . did we , my lord ? 
 brutu . ay , saw you anyth ? 
 varro . no , my lord , i saw noth . 
 claudio . nor i , my lord . 
 brutu . go and commend me to my brother cassiu ; 
 bid him set on hi power betim befor , 
 and we will follow . 
 varro . claudio . it shall be done , my lord . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the plain of philippi . 
 
 enter octaviu , antoni , and their armi . 
 
 octaviu . now , antoni , our hope are answer . 
 you said the enemi would not come down , 
 but keep the hill and upper region . 
 it prove not so . their battl are at hand ; 
 they mean to warn us at philippi here , 
 answer befor we do demand of them . 
 antoni . tut , i am in their bosom , and i know 
 wherefor they do it . they could be content 
 to visit other place , and come down 
 with fear braveri , think by thi face 
 to fasten in our thought that they have courag ; 
 but 't is not so . 
 
 enter a messeng . 
 
 messeng . prepar you , gener . 
 the enemi come on in gallant show ; 
 their bloodi sign of battl is hung out , 
 and someth to be done immedi . 
 antoni . octaviu , lead your battl softli on , 
 upon the left hand of the even field . 
 octaviu . upon the right hand i , keep thou the left . 
 antoni . whi do you cross me in thi exig ? 
 octaviu . i do not cross you , but i will do so . 
 
 march . drum . enter brutu , cassiu , and their armi ; 
 luciliu , titiniu , messala , and other . 
 
 brutu . they stand , and would have parley . 
 cassiu . stand fast , titiniu ; we must out and talk . 
 octaviu . mark antoni , shall we give sign of battl ? 
 antoni . no , caesar , we will answer on their charg . 
 make forth , the gener would have some word . 
 octaviu . stir not until the signal not until the signal . 
 brutu . word befor blow . is it so , countrymen ? 
 octaviu . not that we love word better , as you do . 
 brutu . good word are better than bad stroke , octaviu . 
 antoni . in your bad stroke , brutu , you give good word . 
 wit the hole you made in caesar 's heart , 
 cri `` long live ! hail , caesar ! '' 
 cassiu . antoni , 
 the postur of your blow are yet unknown ; 
 but for your word , they rob the hybla bee , 
 and leav them honeyless . 
 antoni . not stingless too . 
 brutu . o , ye , and soundless too , 
 for you have stol'n their buzz , antoni , 
 and veri wise threat befor you sting . 
 antoni . villain ! you did not so when your vile dagger 
 hack 'd one anoth in the side of caesar . 
 you show 'd your teeth like ape , and fawn 'd like hound , 
 and bow 'd like bondmen , kiss caesar 's feet ; 
 whilst damn casca , like a cur , behind 
 strook caesar on the neck . o you flatter ! 
 cassiu . flatter ? now , brutu , thank yourself . 
 thi tongu had not offend so today , 
 if cassiu might have rule . 
 octaviu . come , come , the caus . if argu make us sweat , 
 the proof of it will turn to redder drop . 
 look , 
 i draw a sword against conspir ; 
 when think you that the sword goe up again ? 
 never , till caesar 's three and thirti wound 
 be well aveng , or till anoth caesar 
 have ad slaughter to the sword of traitor . 
 brutu . caesar , thou canst not die by traitor ' hand , 
 unless thou bring'st them with thee . 
 octaviu . so i hope , 
 i wa not born to die on brutu ' sword . 
 brutu . o , if thou wert the noblest of thi strain , 
 young man , thou couldst not die more honor . 
 cassiu . a peevish school boy , worthless of such honor , 
 join 'd with a masker and a revel ! 
 antoni . old cassiu still ! 
 octaviu . come , antoni , away ! 
 defianc , traitor , hurl we in your teeth . 
 if you dare fight today , come to the field ; 
 if not , when you have stomach . 
 exeunt octaviu , antoni , and their armi . 
 cassiu . whi , now , blow and , swell billow , and swim bark ! 
 the storm is up , and all is on the hazard . 
 brutu . ho , luciliu ! hark , a word with you . 
 luciliu . [ stand forth . ] my lord ? 
 brutu and luciliu convers apart . 
 cassiu . messala ! 
 messala . [ stand forth . ] what say my gener ? 
 cassiu . messala , 
 thi is my birthday , as thi veri day 
 wa cassiu born . give me thi hand , messala . 
 be thou my wit that , against my will , 
 as pompey wa , am i compel 'd to set 
 upon one battl all our liberti . 
 you know that i held epicuru strong , 
 and hi opinion . now i chang my mind , 
 and partli credit thing that do presag . 
 come from sardi , on our former ensign 
 two mighti eagl fell , and there they perch 'd , 
 gorg and feed from our soldier ' hand , 
 who to philippi here consort us . 
 thi morn are they fled away and gone , 
 and in their stead do raven , crow , and kite 
 fli o'er our head and downward look on us , 
 as we were sickli prey . their shadow seem 
 a canopi most fatal , under which 
 our armi lie , readi to give up the ghost . 
 messala . believ not so . 
 cassiu . i but believ it partli , 
 for i am fresh of spirit and resolv 
 to meet all peril veri constantli . 
 brutu . even so , luciliu . 
 cassiu . now , most nobl brutu , 
 the god today stand friendli that we may , 
 lover in peac , lead on our day to age ! 
 but , sinc the affair of men rest still incertain , 
 let 's reason with the worst that may befal . 
 if we do lose thi battl , then is thi 
 the veri last time we shall speak togeth . 
 what are you then determin to do ? 
 brutu . even by the rule of that philosophi 
 by which i did blame cato for the death 
 which he did give himself- i know not how , 
 but i do find it cowardli and vile , 
 for fear of what might fall , so to prevent 
 the time of life- arm myself with patienc 
 to stay the provid of some high power 
 that govern us below . 
 cassiu . then , if we lose thi battl , 
 you are content to be led in triumph 
 thorough the street of rome ? 
 brutu . no , cassiu , no . think not , thou nobl roman , 
 that ever brutu will go bound to rome ; 
 he bear too great a mind . but thi same day 
 must end that work the ide of march begun . 
 and whether we shall meet again i know not . 
 therefor our everlast farewel take . 
 forev , and forev , farewel , cassiu ! 
 if we do meet again , whi , we shall smile ; 
 if not , whi then thi part wa well made . 
 cassiu . forev and forev farewel , brutu ! 
 if we do meet again , we 'll smile inde ; 
 if not , 't is true thi part wa well made . 
 brutu . whi then , lead on . o , that a man might know 
 the end of thi day 's busi ere it come ! 
 but it sufficeth that the day will end , 
 and then the end is known . come , ho ! away ! exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the field of battl . 
 
 alarum . enter brutu and messala . 
 
 brutu . ride , ride , messala , ride , and give these bill 
 unto the legion on the other side . loud alarum . 
 let them set on at onc , for i perceiv 
 but cold demeanor in octavia 's wing , 
 and sudden push give them the overthrow . 
 ride , ride , messala . let them all come down . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 anoth part of the field . 
 
 alarum . enter cassiu and titiniu . 
 
 cassiu . o , look , titiniu , look , the villain fli ! 
 myself have to mine own turn 'd enemi . 
 thi ensign here of mine wa turn back ; 
 i slew the coward , and did take it from him . 
 titiniu . o cassiu , brutu gave the word too earli , 
 who , have some advantag on octaviu , 
 took it too eagerli . hi soldier fell to spoil , 
 whilst we by antoni are all enclos . 
 
 enter pindaru . 
 
 pindaru . fli further off , my lord , fli further off ; 
 mark antoni is in your tent , my lord ; 
 fli , therefor , nobl cassiu , fli far off . 
 cassiu . thi hill is far enough . look , look , titiniu : 
 are those my tent where i perceiv the fire ? 
 titiniu . they are , my lord . 
 cassiu . titiniu , if thou lovest me , 
 mount thou my hors and hide thi spur in him , 
 till he have brought thee up to yonder troop 
 and here again , that i may rest assur 
 whether yond troop are friend or enemi . 
 titiniu . i will be here again , even with a thought . exit . 
 cassiu . go , pindaru , get higher on that hill ; 
 my sight wa ever thick ; regard titiniu , 
 and tell me what thou notest about the field . 
 pindaru ascend the hill . 
 thi day i breath first : time is come round , 
 and where i did begin , there shall i end ; 
 my life is run hi compass . sirrah , what news ? 
 pindaru . [ abov . ] o my lord ! 
 cassiu . what news ? 
 pindaru . [ abov . ] titiniu is enclos round about 
 with horsemen , that make to him on the spur ; 
 yet he spur on . now they are almost on him . 
 now , titiniu ! now some light . o , he light too . 
 he 's ta'en [ shout . ] and , hark ! they shout for joy . 
 cassiu . come down ; behold no more . 
 o , coward that i am , to live so long , 
 to see my best friend ta'en befor my face ! 
 pindaru descend . 
 come hither , sirrah . 
 in parthia did i take thee prison , 
 and then i swore thee , save of thi life , 
 that whatsoev i did bid thee do , 
 thou shouldst attempt it . come now , keep thine oath ; 
 now be a freeman , and with thi good sword , 
 that ran through caesar 's bowel , search thi bosom . 
 stand not to answer : here , take thou the hilt ; 
 and when my face is cover 'd , as 't is now , 
 guid thou the sword . [ pindaru stab him . ] caesar , thou art 
 reveng , 
 even with the sword that kill 'd thee . die . 
 pindaru . so , i am free , yet would not so have been , 
 durst i have done my will . o cassiu ! 
 far from thi countri pindaru shall run , 
 where never roman shall take note of him . exit . 
 
 re-ent titiniu with messala . 
 
 messala . it is but chang , titiniu , for octaviu 
 is overthrown by nobl brutu ' power , 
 as cassiu ' legion are by antoni . 
 titiniu . these tide would well comfort cassiu . 
 messala . where did you leav him ? 
 titiniu . all disconsol , 
 with pindaru hi bondman , on thi hill . 
 messala . is not that he that lie upon the ground ? 
 titiniu . he lie not like the live . o my heart ! 
 messala . is not that he ? 
 titiniu . no , thi wa he , messala , 
 but cassiu is no more . o set sun , 
 as in thi red ray thou dost sink to night , 
 so in hi red blood cassiu ' day is set , 
 the sun of rome is set ! our day is gone ; 
 cloud , dew , and danger come ; our deed are done ! 
 mistrust of my success hath done thi deed . 
 messala . mistrust of good success hath done thi deed . 
 o hate error , melancholi 's child , 
 whi dost thou show to the apt thought of men 
 the thing that are not ? o error , soon conceiv , 
 thou never comest unto a happi birth , 
 but kill'st the mother that engend 'd thee ! 
 titiniu . what , pindaru ! where art thou , pindaru ? 
 messala . seek him , titiniu , whilst i go to meet 
 the nobl brutu , thrust thi report 
 into hi ear . i may say `` thrust '' it , 
 for pierc steel and dart envenom 
 shall be as welcom to the ear of brutu 
 as tide of thi sight . 
 titiniu . hie you , messala , 
 and i will seek for pindaru the while . exit messala . 
 whi didst thou send me forth , brave cassiu ? 
 did i not meet thi friend ? and did not they 
 put on my brow thi wreath of victori , 
 and bid me give it thee ? didst thou not hear their shout ? 
 ala , thou hast misconstru everyth ! 
 but , hold thee , take thi garland on thi brow ; 
 thi brutu bid me give it thee , and i 
 will do hi bid . brutu , come apac , 
 and see how i regard caiu cassiu . 
 by your leav , god , thi is a roman 's part . 
 come , cassiu ' sword , and find titiniu ' heart . 
 kill himself . 
 
 alarum . re-ent messala , with brutu , young cato , 
 and other . 
 
 brutu . where , where , messala , doth hi bodi lie ? 
 messala . lo , yonder , and titiniu mourn it . 
 brutu . titiniu ' face is upward . 
 cato . he is slain . 
 brutu . o juliu caesar , thou art mighti yet ! 
 thi spirit walk abroad , and turn our sword 
 in our own proper entrail . low alarum . 
 cato . brave titiniu ! 
 look whe'er he have not crown 'd dead cassiu ! 
 brutu . are yet two roman live such as these ? 
 the last of all the roman , fare thee well ! 
 it is imposs that ever rome 
 should breed thi fellow . friend , i owe moe tear 
 to thi dead man than you shall see me pay . 
 i shall find time , cassiu , i shall find time . 
 come therefor , and to thaso send hi bodi ; 
 hi funer shall not be in our camp , 
 lest it discomfort us . luciliu , come , 
 and come , young cato ; let us to the field . 
 labio and flavio , set our battl on . 
 't is three o'clock , and roman , yet ere night 
 we shall tri fortun in a second fight . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 anoth part of the field . 
 
 alarum . enter , fight , soldier of both armi ; then brutu , young cato , 
 luciliu , and other . 
 
 brutu . yet , countrymen , o , yet hold up your head ! 
 cato . what bastard doth not ? who will go with me ? 
 i will proclaim my name about the field . 
 i am the son of marcu cato , ho ! 
 a foe to tyrant , and my countri 's friend . 
 i am the son of marcu cato , ho ! 
 brutu . and i am brutu , marcu brutu , i ; 
 brutu , my countri 's friend ; know me for brutu ! exit . 
 luciliu . o young and nobl cato , art thou down ? 
 whi , now thou diest as brave as titiniu , 
 and mayst be honor 'd , be cato 's son . 
 first soldier . yield , or thou diest . 
 luciliu . onli i yield to die . 
 [ offer money . ] there is so much that thou wilt kill me straight : 
 kill brutu , and be honor 'd in hi death . 
 first soldier . we must not . a nobl prison ! 
 second soldier . room , ho ! tell antoni , brutu is ta'en . 
 first soldier . i 'll tell the news . here come the gener . 
 
 enter antoni . 
 
 brutu is ta'en , brutu is ta'en , my lord . 
 antoni . where is he ? 
 luciliu . safe , antoni , brutu is safe enough . 
 i dare assur thee that no enemi 
 shall ever take aliv the nobl brutu ; 
 the god defend him from so great a shame ! 
 when you do find him , or aliv or dead , 
 he will be found like brutu , like himself . 
 antoni . thi is not brutu , friend , but , i assur you , 
 a prize no less in worth . keep thi man safe , 
 give him all kind ; i had rather have 
 such men my friend than enemi . go on , 
 and see wheer brutu be aliv or dead , 
 and bring us word unto octaviu ' tent 
 how everyth is chanc . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 anoth part of the field . 
 
 enter brutu , dardaniu , clitu , strato , and volumniu . 
 
 brutu . come , poor remain of friend , rest on thi rock . 
 clitu . statiliu show 'd the torchlight , but , my lord , 
 he came not back . he is or ta'en or slain . 
 brutu . sit thee down , clitu . slay is the word : 
 it is a deed in fashion . hark thee , clitu . whisper . 
 clitu . what , i , my lord ? no , not for all the world . 
 brutu . peac then , no word . 
 clitu . i 'll rather kill myself . 
 brutu . hark thee , dardaniu . whisper . 
 dardaniu . shall i do such a deed ? 
 clitu . o dardaniu ! 
 dardaniu . o clitu ! 
 clitu . what ill request did brutu make to thee ? 
 dardaniu . to kill him , clitu . look , he medit . 
 clitu . now is that nobl vessel full of grief , 
 that it run over even at hi eye . 
 brutu . come hither , good volumniu , list a word . 
 volumniu . what say my lord ? 
 brutu . whi , thi , volumniu : 
 the ghost of caesar hath appear 'd to me 
 two sever time by night ; at sardi onc , 
 and thi last night here in philippi field . 
 i know my hour is come . 
 volumniu . not so , my lord . 
 brutu . nay i am sure it is , volumniu . 
 thou seest the world , volumniu , how it goe ; 
 our enemi have beat us to the pit ; low alarum . 
 it is more worthi to leap in ourselv 
 than tarri till they push us . good volumniu , 
 thou know'st that we two went to school togeth ; 
 even for that our love of old , i prithe , 
 hold thou my sword-hilt , whilst i run on it . 
 volumniu . that 's not an offic for a friend , my lord . 
 alarum still . 
 clitu . fli , fli , my lord , there is no tarri here . 
 brutu . farewel to you , and you , and you , volumniu . 
 strato , thou hast been all thi while asleep ; 
 farewel to thee too , strato . countrymen , 
 my heart doth joy that yet in all my life 
 i found no man but he wa true to me . 
 i shall have glori by thi lose day , 
 more than octaviu and mark antoni 
 by thi vile conquest shall attain unto . 
 so , fare you well at onc , for brutu ' tongu 
 hath almost end hi life 's histori . 
 night hang upon mine eye , my bone would rest 
 that have but labor 'd to attain thi hour . 
 alarum . cri within , `` fli , fli , fli ! '' 
 clitu . fli , my lord , fli . 
 brutu . henc ! i will follow . 
 exeunt clitu , dardaniu , and volumniu . 
 i prithe , strato , stay thou by thi lord . 
 thou art a fellow of a good respect ; 
 thi life hath had some smatch of honor in it . 
 hold then my sword , and turn away thi face , 
 while i do run upon it . wilt thou , strato ? 
 strato . give me your hand first . fare you well , my lord . 
 brutu . farewel , good strato . run on hi sword . 
 caesar , now be still ; 
 i kill 'd not thee with half so good a will . die . 
 
 alarum . retreat . enter octaviu , antoni , messala , 
 luciliu , and the armi . 
 
 octaviu . what man is that ? 
 messala . my master 's man . strato , where is thi master ? 
 strato . free from the bondag you are in , messala : 
 the conqueror can but make a fire of him ; 
 for brutu onli overcam himself , 
 and no man els hath honor by hi death . 
 luciliu . so brutu should be found . i thank thee , brutu , 
 that thou hast prove luciliu ' say true . 
 octaviu . all that serv brutu , i will entertain them . 
 fellow , wilt thou bestow thi time with me ? 
 strato . ay , if messala will prefer me to you . 
 octaviu . do so , good messala . 
 messala . how die my master , strato ? 
 strato . i held the sword , and he did run on it . 
 messala . octaviu , then take him to follow thee 
 that did the latest servic to my master . 
 antoni . thi wa the noblest roman of them all . 
 all the conspir , save onli he , 
 did that they did in envi of great caesar ; 
 he onli , in a gener honest thought 
 and common good to all , made one of them . 
 hi life wa gentl , and the element 
 so mix 'd in him that natur might stand up 
 and say to all the world , `` thi wa a man ! '' 
 octaviu . accord to hi virtu let us use him 
 with all respect and rite of burial . 
 within my tent hi bone tonight shall lie , 
 most like a soldier , order honor . 
 so call the field to rest , and let 's away , 
 to part the glori of thi happi day . exeunt . 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 the tragedi of king lear 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona . 
 
 ferdinand , king of navarr 
 berown , lord attend on the king 
 longavil , `` `` `` `` `` 
 dumain , `` `` `` `` `` 
 boyet , lord attend on the princess of franc 
 marcad , `` `` `` `` `` `` `` 
 don adriano de armado , fantast spaniard 
 sir nathaniel , a curat 
 holofern , a schoolmast 
 dull , a constabl 
 costard , a clown 
 moth , page to armado 
 a forest 
 
 the princess of franc 
 rosalin , ladi attend on the princess 
 maria , `` `` `` `` `` 
 katharin , ladi attend on the princess 
 jaquenetta , a countri wench 
 
 lord , attend , etc . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 navarr 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 navarr . the king 's park 
 
 enter the king , berown , longavil , and dumain 
 
 king . let fame , that all hunt after in their live , 
 live regist'r upon our brazen tomb , 
 and then grace us in the disgrac of death ; 
 when , spite of cormor devour time , 
 th ' endeavour of thi present breath may buy 
 that honour which shall bate hi scyth 's keen edg , 
 and make us heir of all etern . 
 therefor , brave conquerors- for so you are 
 that war against your own affect 
 and the huge armi of the world 's desires- 
 our late edict shall strongli stand in forc : 
 navarr shall be the wonder of the world ; 
 our court shall be a littl academ , 
 still and contempl in live art . 
 you three , berown , dumain , and longavil , 
 have sworn for three year ' term to live with me 
 my fellow-scholar , and to keep those statut 
 that are record in thi schedul here . 
 your oath are pass 'd ; and now subscrib your name , 
 that hi own hand may strike hi honour down 
 that violat the smallest branch herein . 
 if you are arm 'd to do as sworn to do , 
 subscrib to your deep oath , and keep it too . 
 longavil . i am resolv 'd ; 't is but a three year ' fast . 
 the mind shall banquet , though the bodi pine . 
 fat paunch have lean pate ; and dainti bit 
 make rich the rib , but bankrupt quit the wit . 
 dumain . my love lord , dumain is mortifi . 
 the grosser manner of these world 's delight 
 he throw upon the gross world 's baser slave ; 
 to love , to wealth , to pomp , i pine and die , 
 with all these live in philosophi . 
 berown . i can but say their protest over ; 
 so much , dear lieg , i have alreadi sworn , 
 that is , to live and studi here three year . 
 but there are other strict observ , 
 as : not to see a woman in that term , 
 which i hope well is not enrol there ; 
 and one day in a week to touch no food , 
 and but one meal on everi day besid , 
 the which i hope is not enrol there ; 
 and then to sleep but three hour in the night 
 and not be seen to wink of all the day- 
 when i wa wont to think no harm all night , 
 and make a dark night too of half the day- 
 which i hope well is not enrol there . 
 o , these are barren task , too hard to keep , 
 not to see ladi , studi , fast , not sleep ! 
 king . your oath is pass 'd to pass away from these . 
 berown . let me say no , my lieg , an if you pleas : 
 i onli swore to studi with your grace , 
 and stay here in your court for three year ' space . 
 longavil . you swore to that , berown , and to the rest . 
 berown . by yea and nay , sir , then i swore in jest . 
 what is the end of studi , let me know . 
 king . whi , that to know which els we should not know . 
 berown . thing hid and barr 'd , you mean , from common sens ? 
 king . ay , that is studi 's god-lik recompens . 
 berown . come on , then ; i will swear to studi so , 
 to know the thing i am forbid to know , 
 as thu : to studi where i well may dine , 
 when i to feast expressli am forbid ; 
 or studi where to meet some mistress fine , 
 when mistress from common sens are hid ; 
 or , have sworn too hard-a-keep oath , 
 studi to break it , and not break my troth . 
 if studi 's gain be thu , and thi be so , 
 studi know that which yet it doth not know . 
 swear me to thi , and i will ne'er say no . 
 king . these be the stop that hinder studi quit , 
 and train our intellect to vain delight . 
 berown . whi , all delight are vain ; but that most vain 
 which , with pain purcha 'd , doth inherit pain , 
 as pain to pore upon a book 
 to seek the light of truth ; while truth the while 
 doth fals blind the eyesight of hi look . 
 light , seek light , doth light of light beguil ; 
 so , ere you find where light in dark lie , 
 your light grow dark by lose of your eye . 
 studi me how to pleas the eye inde , 
 by fix it upon a fairer eye ; 
 who dazzl so , that eye shall be hi heed , 
 and give him light that it wa blind by . 
 studi is like the heaven 's gloriou sun , 
 that will not be deep-search 'd with sauci look ; 
 small have continu plodder ever won , 
 save base author from other ' book . 
 these earthli godfath of heaven 's light 
 that give a name to everi fix star 
 have no more profit of their shine night 
 than those that walk and wot not what they are . 
 too much to know is to know nought but fame ; 
 and everi godfath can give a name . 
 king . how well he 's read , to reason against read ! 
 dumain . proceed well , to stop all good proceed ! 
 longavil . he weed the corn , and still let grow the weed . 
 berown . the spring is near , when green gees are a-breed . 
 dumain . how follow that ? 
 berown . fit in hi place and time . 
 dumain . in reason noth . 
 berown . someth then in rhyme . 
 longavil . berown is like an enviou sneap frost 
 that bite the first-born infant of the spring . 
 berown . well , say i am ; whi should proud summer boast 
 befor the bird have ani caus to sing ? 
 whi should i joy in ani abort birth ? 
 at christma i no more desir a rose 
 than wish a snow in may 's new-fangl show ; 
 but like of each thing that in season grow ; 
 so you , to studi now it is too late , 
 climb o'er the hous to unlock the littl gate . 
 king . well , sit out ; go home , berown ; adieu . 
 berown . no , my good lord ; i have sworn to stay with you ; 
 and though i have for barbar spoke more 
 than for that angel knowledg you can say , 
 yet confid i 'll keep what i have swore , 
 and bide the penanc of each three year ' day . 
 give me the paper ; let me read the same ; 
 and to the strictest decre i 'll write my name . 
 king . how well thi yield rescu thee from shame ! 
 berown . [ read ] 'item . that no woman shall come within a mile of 
 my court'- hath thi been proclaim ? 
 longavil . four day ago . 
 berown . let 's see the penalti . [ read ] '-on pain of lose her 
 tongu . ' who devi 'd thi penalti ? 
 longavil . marri , that did i . 
 berown . sweet lord , and whi ? 
 longavil . to fright them henc with that dread penalti . 
 berown . a danger law against gentil . 
 [ read ] 'item . if ani man be seen to talk with a woman within 
 the term of three year , he shall endur such public shame as the 
 rest of the court can possibl devis . ' 
 thi articl , my lieg , yourself must break ; 
 for well you know here come in embassi 
 the french king 's daughter , with yourself to speak- 
 a mild of grace and complet majesty- 
 about surrend up of aquitain 
 to her decrepit , sick , and bedrid father ; 
 therefor thi articl is made in vain , 
 or vainli come th ' admir princess hither . 
 king . what say you , lord ? whi , thi wa quit forgot . 
 berown . so studi evermor is over-shot . 
 while it doth studi to have what it would , 
 it doth forget to do the thing it should ; 
 and when it hath the thing it hunteth most , 
 't is won as town with fire- so won , so lost . 
 king . we must of forc dispens with thi decre ; 
 she must lie here on mere necess . 
 berown . necess will make us all forsworn 
 three thousand time within thi three year ' space ; 
 for everi man with hi affect is born , 
 not by might mast'r , but by special grace . 
 if i break faith , thi word shall speak for me : 
 i am forsworn on mere necess . 
 so to the law at larg i write my name ; [ subscrib ] 
 and he that break them in the least degre 
 stand in attaind of etern shame . 
 suggest are to other as to me ; 
 but i believ , although i seem so loath , 
 i am the last that will last keep hi oath . 
 but is there no quick recreat grant ? 
 king . ay , that there is . our court , you know , is haunt 
 with a refin travel of spain , 
 a man in all the world 's new fashion plant , 
 that hath a mint of phrase in hi brain ; 
 one who the music of hi own vain tongu 
 doth ravish like enchant harmoni ; 
 a man of complement , whom right and wrong 
 have chose as umpir of their mutini . 
 thi child of fanci , that armado hight , 
 for interim to our studi shall relat , 
 in high-born word , the worth of mani a knight 
 from tawni spain lost in the world 's debat . 
 how you delight , my lord , i know not , i ; 
 but i protest i love to hear him lie , 
 and i will use him for my minstrelsi . 
 berown . armado is a most illustri wight , 
 a man of fire-new word , fashion 's own knight . 
 longavil . costard the swain and he shall be our sport ; 
 and so to studi three year is but short . 
 
 enter dull , a constabl , with a letter , and costard 
 
 dull . which is the duke 's own person ? 
 berown . thi , fellow . what wouldst ? 
 dull . i myself reprehend hi own person , for i am hi grace 's 
 farborough ; but i would see hi own person in flesh and blood . 
 berown . thi is he . 
 dull . signior arme- arme- commend you . there 's villaini abroad ; 
 thi letter will tell you more . 
 costard . sir , the contempt thereof are as touch me . 
 king . a letter from the magnific armado . 
 berown . how low soever the matter , i hope in god for high word . 
 longavil . a high hope for a low heaven . god grant us patienc ! 
 berown . to hear , or forbear hear ? 
 longavil . to hear meekli , sir , and to laugh moder ; or , to 
 forbear both . 
 berown . well , sir , be it as the style shall give us caus to climb 
 in the merri . 
 costard . the matter is to me , sir , as concern jaquenetta . 
 the manner of it is , i wa taken with the manner . 
 berown . in what manner ? 
 costard . in manner and form follow , sir ; all those three : i wa 
 seen with her in the manor-hous , sit with her upon the form , 
 and taken follow her into the park ; which , put togeth , is in 
 manner and form follow . now , sir , for the manner- it is the 
 manner of a man to speak to a woman . for the form- in some form . 
 berown . for the follow , sir ? 
 costard . as it shall follow in my correct ; and god defend the 
 right ! 
 king . will you hear thi letter with attent ? 
 berown . as we would hear an oracl . 
 costard . such is the simplic of man to hearken after the flesh . 
 king . [ read ] 'great deputi , the welkin 's viceger and sole 
 domin of navarr , my soul 's earth 's god and bodi 's fost'r 
 patron'- 
 costard . not a word of costard yet . 
 king . [ read ] 'so it is'- 
 costard . it may be so ; but if he say it is so , he is , in tell 
 true , but so . 
 king . peac ! 
 costard . be to me , and everi man that dare not fight ! 
 king . no word ! 
 costard . of other men 's secret , i beseech you . 
 king . [ read ] 'so it is , besieg with sable-colour melancholi , i 
 did commend the black oppress humour to the most wholesom 
 physic of thi health-giv air ; and , as i am a gentleman , betook 
 myself to walk . the time when ? about the sixth hour ; when beast 
 most graze , bird best peck , and men sit down to that nourish 
 which is call supper . so much for the time when . now for the 
 ground which ? which , i mean , i upon ; it is yclepe thi park . then 
 for the place where ? where , i mean , i did encount that obscen 
 and most prepost'r event that draweth from my snow-whit pen 
 the ebon-colour ink which here thou viewest , beholdest , 
 surveyest , or seest . but to the place where ? it standeth 
 north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thi 
 curious-knot garden . there did i see that low-spirit swain , 
 that base minnow of thi mirth , ' 
 costard . me ? 
 king . 'that unlett small-know soul , ' 
 costard . me ? 
 king . 'that shallow vassal , ' 
 costard . still me ? 
 king . 'which , as i rememb , hight costard , ' 
 costard . o , me ! 
 king . 'sort and consort , contrari to thi establish proclaim 
 edict and contin canon ; which , with , o , with- but with thi i 
 passion to say wherewith- ' 
 costard . with a wench . 
 king . 'with a child of our grandmoth eve , a femal ; or , for thi 
 more sweet understand , a woman . him i , as my ever-esteem 
 duti prick me on , have sent to thee , to receiv the meed of 
 punish , by thi sweet grace 's offic , antoni dull , a man of 
 good reput , carriag , bear , and estim . ' 
 dull . me , a n't shall pleas you ; i am antoni dull . 
 king . 'for jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel call , which i 
 apprehend with the aforesaid swain- i keep her as a vessel of 
 thi law 's furi ; and shall , at the least of thi sweet notic , 
 bring her to trial . thine , in all compliment of devot and 
 heart-burn heat of duti , 
 don adriano de armado . ' 
 
 berown . thi is not so well as i look 'd for , but the best that 
 ever i heard . 
 king . ay , the best for the worst . but , sirrah , what say you to 
 thi ? 
 costard . sir , i confess the wench . 
 king . did you hear the proclam ? 
 costard . i do confess much of the hear it , but littl of the 
 mark of it . 
 king . it wa proclaim a year 's imprison to be taken with a 
 wench . 
 costard . i wa taken with none , sir ; i wa taken with a damsel . 
 king . well , it wa proclaim damsel . 
 costard . thi wa no damsel neither , sir ; she wa a virgin . 
 king . it is so vari too , for it wa proclaim virgin . 
 costard . if it were , i deni her virgin ; i wa taken with a maid . 
 king . thi 'maid ' not serv your turn , sir . 
 costard . thi maid will serv my turn , sir . 
 king . sir , i will pronounc your sentenc : you shall fast a week 
 with bran and water . 
 costard . i had rather pray a month with mutton and porridg . 
 king . and don armado shall be your keeper . 
 my lord berown , see him deliv o'er ; 
 and go we , lord , to put in practic that 
 which each to other hath so strongli sworn . 
 exeunt king , longavil , and dumain 
 berown . i 'll lay my head to ani good man 's hat 
 these oath and law will prove an idl scorn . 
 sirrah , come on . 
 costard . i suffer for the truth , sir ; for true it is i wa taken 
 with jaquenetta , and jaquenetta is a true girl ; and therefor 
 welcom the sour cup of prosper ! afflict may one day smile 
 again ; and till then , sit thee down , sorrow . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the park 
 
 enter armado and moth , hi page 
 
 armado . boy , what sign is it when a man of great spirit grow 
 melancholi ? 
 moth . a great sign , sir , that he will look sad . 
 armado . whi , sad is one and the self-sam thing , dear imp . 
 moth . no , no ; o lord , sir , no ! 
 armado . how canst thou part sad and melancholi , my tender 
 juven ? 
 moth . by a familiar demonstr of the work , my tough signior . 
 armado . whi tough signior ? whi tough signior ? 
 moth . whi tender juven ? whi tender juven ? 
 armado . i spoke it , tender juven , as a congruent epitheton 
 appertain to thi young day , which we may nomin tender . 
 moth . and i , tough signior , as an appertin titl to your old 
 time , which we may name tough . 
 armado . pretti and apt . 
 moth . how mean you , sir ? i pretti , and my say apt ? or i apt , and 
 my say pretti ? 
 armado . thou pretti , becaus littl . 
 moth . littl pretti , becaus littl . wherefor apt ? 
 armado . and therefor apt , becaus quick . 
 moth . speak you thi in my prais , master ? 
 armado . in thi condign prais . 
 moth . i will prais an eel with the same prais . 
 armado . that an eel is ingeni ? 
 moth . that an eel is quick . 
 armado . i do say thou art quick in answer ; thou heat'st my blood . 
 moth . i am answer 'd , sir . 
 armado . i love not to be cross 'd . 
 moth . [ asid ] he speak the mere contrari : cross love not him . 
 armado . i have promis to studi three year with the duke . 
 moth . you may do it in an hour , sir . 
 armado . imposs . 
 moth . how mani is one thrice told ? 
 armado . i am ill at reck'n ; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster . 
 moth . you are a gentleman and a gamest , sir . 
 armado . i confess both ; they are both the varnish of a complet 
 man . 
 moth . then i am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ac 
 amount to . 
 armado . it doth amount to one more than two . 
 moth . which the base vulgar do call three . 
 armado . true . 
 moth . whi , sir , is thi such a piec of studi ? now here is three 
 studi ere ye 'll thrice wink ; and how easi it is to put 'year ' 
 to the word 'three , ' and studi three year in two word , the 
 danc hors will tell you . 
 armado . a most fine figur ! 
 moth . [ asid ] to prove you a cipher . 
 armado . i will hereupon confess i am in love . and as it is base for 
 a soldier to love , so am i in love with a base wench . if draw 
 my sword against the humour of affect would deliv me from 
 the reprob thought of it , i would take desir prison , and 
 ransom him to ani french courtier for a new-devi 'd curtsi . i 
 think scorn to sigh ; methink i should out-swear cupid . comfort 
 me , boy ; what great men have been in love ? 
 moth . hercul , master . 
 armado . most sweet hercul ! more author , dear boy , name more ; 
 and , sweet my child , let them be men of good reput and carriag . 
 moth . samson , master ; he wa a man of good carriag , great 
 carriag , for he carri the town gate on hi back like a 
 porter ; and he wa in love . 
 armado . o well-knit samson ! strong-joint samson ! i do excel thee 
 in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carri gate . i am in 
 love too . who wa samson 's love , my dear moth ? 
 moth . a woman , master . 
 armado . of what complexion ? 
 moth . of all the four , or the three , or the two , or one of the 
 four . 
 armado . tell me precis of what complexion . 
 moth . of the sea-wat green , sir . 
 armado . is that one of the four complexion ? 
 moth . as i have read , sir ; and the best of them too . 
 armado . green , inde , is the colour of lover ; but to have a love 
 of that colour , methink samson had small reason for it . he 
 sure affect her for her wit . 
 moth . it wa so , sir ; for she had a green wit . 
 armado . my love is most immacul white and red . 
 moth . most macul thought , master , are mask 'd under such 
 colour . 
 armado . defin , defin , well-educ infant . 
 moth . my father 's wit my mother 's tongu assist me ! 
 armado . sweet invoc of a child ; most pretti , and pathet ! 
 moth . if she be made of white and red , 
 her fault will ne'er be known ; 
 for blush cheek by fault are bred , 
 and fear by pale white shown . 
 then if she fear , or be to blame , 
 by thi you shall not know ; 
 for still her cheek possess the same 
 which nativ she doth owe . 
 a danger rhyme , master , against the reason of white and red . 
 armado . is there not a ballad , boy , of the king and the beggar ? 
 moth . the world wa veri guilti of such a ballad some three age 
 sinc ; but i think now 't is not to be found ; or if it were , it 
 would neither serv for the write nor the tune . 
 armado . i will have that subject newli writ o'er , that i may 
 exampl my digress by some mighti preced . boy , i do love 
 that countri girl that i took in the park with the ration hind 
 costard ; she deserv well . 
 moth . [ asid ] to be whipt ; and yet a better love than my master . 
 armado . sing , boy ; my spirit grow heavi in love . 
 moth . and that 's great marvel , love a light wench . 
 armado . i say , sing . 
 moth . forbear till thi compani be past . 
 
 enter dull , costard , and jaquenetta 
 
 dull . sir , the duke 's pleasur is that you keep costard safe ; and 
 you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penanc ; but ' a 
 must fast three day a week . for thi damsel , i must keep her at 
 the park ; she is allow 'd for the day-woman . fare you well . 
 armado . i do betray myself with blush . maid ! 
 jaquenetta . man ! 
 armado . i will visit thee at the lodg . 
 jaquenetta . that 's herebi . 
 armado . i know where it is situat . 
 jaquenetta . lord , how wise you are ! 
 armado . i will tell thee wonder . 
 jaquenetta . with that face ? 
 armado . i love thee . 
 jaquenetta . so i heard you say . 
 armado . and so , farewel . 
 jaquenetta . fair weather after you ! 
 dull . come , jaquenetta , away . exit with jaquenetta 
 armado . villain , thou shalt fast for thi offenc ere thou be 
 pardon . 
 costard . well , sir , i hope when i do it i shall do it on a full 
 stomach . 
 armado . thou shalt be heavili punish . 
 costard . i am more bound to you than your fellow , for they are but 
 lightli reward . 
 armado . take away thi villain ; shut him up . 
 moth . come , you transgress slave , away . 
 costard . let me not be pent up , sir ; i will fast , be loos . 
 moth . no , sir ; that were fast , and loos . thou shalt to prison . 
 costard . well , if ever i do see the merri day of desol that i 
 have seen , some shall see . 
 moth . what shall some see ? 
 costard . nay , noth , master moth , but what they look upon . it is 
 not for prison to be too silent in their word , and therefor 
 i will say noth . i thank god i have as littl patienc as 
 anoth man , and therefor i can be quiet . 
 exeunt moth and costard 
 armado . i do affect the veri ground , which is base , where her shoe , 
 which is baser , guid by her foot , which is basest , doth tread . 
 i shall be forsworn- which is a great argument of falsehood- if i 
 love . and how can that be true love which is fals attempt ? 
 love is a familiar ; love is a devil . there is no evil angel but 
 love . yet wa samson so tempt , and he had an excel 
 strength ; yet wa solomon so seduc , and he had a veri good wit . 
 cupid 's butt-shaft is too hard for hercul ' club , and therefor 
 too much odd for a spaniard 's rapier . the first and second caus 
 will not serv my turn ; the passado he respect not , the duello 
 he regard not ; hi disgrac is to be call boy , but hi glori 
 is to subdu men . adieu , valour ; rust , rapier ; be still , drum ; 
 for your manag is in love ; yea , he loveth . assist me , some 
 extempor god of rhyme , for i am sure i shall turn sonnet . 
 devis , wit ; write , pen ; for i am for whole volum in folio . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene ii . 
 the park 
 
 enter the princess of franc , with three attend ladi , 
 rosalin , maria , katharin , boyet , and two other lord 
 
 boyet . now , madam , summon up your dearest spirit . 
 consid who the king your father send , 
 to whom he send , and what 's hi embassi : 
 yourself , held preciou in the world 's esteem , 
 to parley with the sole inheritor 
 of all perfect that a man may owe , 
 matchless navarr ; the plea of no less weight 
 than aquitain , a dowri for a queen . 
 be now as prodig of all dear grace 
 as natur wa in make grace dear , 
 when she did starv the gener world besid 
 and prodig gave them all to you . 
 princess of franc . good lord boyet , my beauti , though but mean , 
 need not the paint flourish of your prais . 
 beauti is bought by judgment of the eye , 
 not utt'r by base sale of chapmen 's tongu ; 
 i am less proud to hear you tell my worth 
 than you much will to be count wise 
 in spend your wit in the prais of mine . 
 but now to task the tasker : good boyet , 
 you are not ignor all-tel fame 
 doth nois abroad navarr hath made a vow , 
 till pain studi shall outwear three year , 
 no woman may approach hi silent court . 
 therefor to 's seemeth it a need cours , 
 befor we enter hi forbidden gate , 
 to know hi pleasur ; and in that behalf , 
 bold of your worthi , we singl you 
 as our best-mov fair solicitor . 
 tell him the daughter of the king of franc , 
 on seriou busi , crave quick dispatch , 
 importun person confer with hi grace . 
 hast , signifi so much ; while we attend , 
 like humble-visag 'd suitor , hi high will . 
 boyet . proud of employ , willingli i go . 
 princess of franc . all pride is will pride , and your is so . 
 exit boyet 
 who are the votari , my love lord , 
 that are vow-fellow with thi virtuou duke ? 
 first lord . lord longavil is one . 
 princess of franc . know you the man ? 
 maria . i know him , madam ; at a marriag feast , 
 between lord perigort and the beauteou heir 
 of jaqu falconbridg , solemn 
 in normandi , saw i thi longavil . 
 a man of sovereign part , peerless esteem 'd , 
 well fit in art , gloriou in arm ; 
 noth becom him ill that he would well . 
 the onli soil of hi fair virtu 's gloss , 
 if virtu 's gloss will stain with ani soil , 
 is a sharp wit match 'd with too blunt a will , 
 whose edg hath power to cut , whose will still will 
 it should none spare that come within hi power . 
 princess of franc . some merri mock lord , belik ; is't so ? 
 maria . they say so most that most hi humour know . 
 princess of franc . such short-liv 'd wit do wither as they grow . 
 who are the rest ? 
 katharin . the young dumain , a well-accomplish 'd youth , 
 of all that virtu love for virtu love ; 
 most power to do most harm , least know ill , 
 for he hath wit to make an ill shape good , 
 and shape to win grace though he had no wit . 
 i saw him at the duke alencon 's onc ; 
 and much too littl of that good i saw 
 is my report to hi great worthi . 
 rosalin . anoth of these student at that time 
 wa there with him , if i have heard a truth . 
 berown they call him ; but a merrier man , 
 within the limit of becom mirth , 
 i never spent an hour 's talk withal . 
 hi eye beget occas for hi wit , 
 for everi object that the one doth catch 
 the other turn to a mirth-mov jest , 
 which hi fair tongu , conceit 's expositor , 
 deliv in such apt and graciou word 
 that age ear play truant at hi tale , 
 and younger hear are quit ravish ; 
 so sweet and volubl is hi discours . 
 princess of franc . god bless my ladi ! are they all in love , 
 that everi one her own hath garnish 
 with such bedeck ornament of prais ? 
 first lord . here come boyet . 
 
 re-ent boyet 
 
 princess of franc . now , what admitt , lord ? 
 boyet . navarr had notic of your fair approach , 
 and he and hi competitor in oath 
 were all address 'd to meet you , gentl ladi , 
 befor i came . marri , thu much i have learnt : 
 he rather mean to lodg you in the field , 
 like one that come here to besieg hi court , 
 than seek a dispens for hi oath , 
 to let you enter hi unpeopl hous . 
 [ the ladies-in-wait mask ] 
 
 enter king , longavil , dumain , berown , 
 and attend 
 
 here come navarr . 
 king . fair princess , welcom to the court of navarr . 
 princess of franc . 'fair ' i give you back again ; and 'welcom ' i 
 have not yet . the roof of thi court is too high to be your , and 
 welcom to the wide field too base to be mine . 
 king . you shall be welcom , madam , to my court . 
 princess of franc . i will be welcom then ; conduct me thither . 
 king . hear me , dear ladi : i have sworn an oath- 
 princess of franc . our ladi help my lord ! he 'll be forsworn . 
 king . not for the world , fair madam , by my will . 
 princess of franc . whi , will shall break it ; will , and noth 
 els . 
 king . your ladyship is ignor what it is . 
 princess of franc . were my lord so , hi ignor were wise , 
 where now hi knowledg must prove ignor . 
 i hear your grace hath sworn out house-keep . 
 't is deadli sin to keep that oath , my lord , 
 and sin to break it . 
 but pardon me , i am too sudden bold ; 
 to teach a teacher ill beseemeth me . 
 vouchsaf to read the purpos of my come , 
 and suddenli resolv me in my suit . [ give a paper ] 
 king . madam , i will , if suddenli i may . 
 princess of franc . you will the sooner that i were away , 
 for you 'll prove perjur 'd if you make me stay . 
 berown . did not i danc with you in brabant onc ? 
 katharin . did not i danc with you in brabant onc ? 
 berown . i know you did . 
 katharin . how needless wa it then to ask the question ! 
 berown . you must not be so quick . 
 katharin . 't is long of you , that spur me with such question . 
 berown . your wit 's too hot , it speed too fast , 'twill tire . 
 katharin . not till it leav the rider in the mire . 
 berown . what time o ' day ? 
 katharin . the hour that fool should ask . 
 berown . now fair befal your mask ! 
 katharin . fair fall the face it cover ! 
 berown . and send you mani lover ! 
 katharin . amen , so you be none . 
 berown . nay , then will i be gone . 
 king . madam , your father here doth intim 
 the payment of a hundr thousand crown ; 
 be but the one half of an entir sum 
 disburs by my father in hi war . 
 but say that he or we , as neither have , 
 receiv 'd that sum , yet there remain unpaid 
 a hundr thousand more , in sureti of the which , 
 one part of aquitain is bound to us , 
 although not valu to the money 's worth . 
 if then the king your father will restor 
 but that one half which is unsatisfi , 
 we will give up our right in aquitain , 
 and hold fair friendship with hi majesti . 
 but that , it seem , he littl purposeth , 
 for here he doth demand to have repaid 
 a hundr thousand crown ; and not demand , 
 on payment of a hundr thousand crown , 
 to have hi titl live in aquitain ; 
 which we much rather had depart withal , 
 and have the money by our father lent , 
 than aquitain so geld as it is . 
 dear princess , were not hi request so far 
 from reason 's yield , your fair self should make 
 a yield 'gainst some reason in my breast , 
 and go well satisfi to franc again . 
 princess of franc . you do the king my father too much wrong , 
 and wrong the reput of your name , 
 in so unseem to confess receipt 
 of that which hath so faith been paid . 
 king . i do protest i never heard of it ; 
 and , if you prove it , i 'll repay it back 
 or yield up aquitain . 
 princess of franc . we arrest your word . 
 boyet , you can produc acquitt 
 for such a sum from special offic 
 of charl hi father . 
 king . satisfi me so . 
 boyet . so pleas your grace , the packet is not come , 
 where that and other specialti are bound ; 
 to-morrow you shall have a sight of them . 
 king . it shall suffic me ; at which interview 
 all liber reason i will yield unto . 
 meantim receiv such welcom at my hand 
 as honour , without breach of honour , may 
 make tender of to thi true worthi . 
 you may not come , fair princess , within my gate ; 
 but here without you shall be so receiv 'd 
 as you shall deem yourself lodg 'd in my heart , 
 though so deni fair harbour in my hous . 
 your own good thought excus me , and farewel . 
 to-morrow shall we visit you again . 
 princess of franc . sweet health and fair desir consort your 
 grace ! 
 king . thi own wish wish i thee in everi place . 
 exit with attend 
 berown . ladi , i will commend you to mine own heart . 
 rosalin . pray you , do my commend ; 
 i would be glad to see it . 
 berown . i would you heard it groan . 
 rosalin . is the fool sick ? 
 berown . sick at the heart . 
 rosalin . alack , let it blood . 
 berown . would that do it good ? 
 rosalin . my physic say 'ay . ' 
 berown . will you prick't with your eye ? 
 rosalin . no point , with my knife . 
 berown . now , god save thi life ! 
 rosalin . and your from long live ! 
 berown . i can not stay thanksgiv . [ retir ] 
 dumain . sir , i pray you , a word : what ladi is that same ? 
 boyet . the heir of alencon , katharin her name . 
 dumain . a gallant ladi ! monsieur , fare you well . exit 
 longavil . i beseech you a word : what is she in the white ? 
 boyet . a woman sometim , an you saw her in the light . 
 longavil . perchanc light in the light . i desir her name . 
 boyet . she hath but one for herself ; to desir that were a shame . 
 longavil . pray you , sir , whose daughter ? 
 boyet . her mother 's , i have heard . 
 longavil . god 's bless on your beard ! 
 boyet . good sir , be not offend ; 
 she is an heir of falconbridg . 
 longavil . nay , my choler is end . 
 she is a most sweet ladi . 
 boyet . not unlik , sir ; that may be . exit longavil 
 berown . what 's her name in the cap ? 
 boyet . rosalin , by good hap . 
 berown . is she wed or no ? 
 boyet . to her will , sir , or so . 
 berown . you are welcom , sir ; adieu ! 
 boyet . farewel to me , sir , and welcom to you . 
 exit berown . ladi unmask 
 maria . that last is berown , the merri mad-cap lord ; 
 not a word with him but a jest . 
 boyet . and everi jest but a word . 
 princess of franc . it wa well done of you to take him at hi 
 word . 
 boyet . i wa as will to grappl as he wa to board . 
 katharin . two hot sheep , marri ! 
 boyet . and wherefor not ship ? 
 no sheep , sweet lamb , unless we feed on your lip . 
 katharin . you sheep and i pasture- shall that finish the jest ? 
 boyet . so you grant pastur for me . [ offer to kiss her ] 
 katharin . not so , gentl beast ; 
 my lip are no common , though sever they be . 
 boyet . belong to whom ? 
 katharin . to my fortun and me . 
 princess of franc . good wit will be jangl ; but , gentl , 
 agre ; 
 thi civil war of wit were much better use 
 on navarr and hi book-men , for here 't is abus . 
 boyet . if my observ , which veri seldom lie , 
 by the heart 's still rhetor disclos with eye , 
 deceiv me not now , navarr is infect . 
 princess of franc . with what ? 
 boyet . with that which we lover entitl 'affect . ' 
 princess of franc . your reason ? 
 boyet . whi , all hi behaviour did make their retir 
 to the court of hi eye , peep thorough desir . 
 hi heart , like an agat , with your print impress , 
 proud with hi form , in hi eye pride express ; 
 hi tongu , all impati to speak and not see , 
 did stumbl with hast in hi eyesight to be ; 
 all sens to that sens did make their repair , 
 to feel onli look on fairest of fair . 
 methought all hi sens were lock 'd in hi eye , 
 as jewel in crystal for some princ to buy ; 
 who , tend'r their own worth from where they were glass 'd , 
 did point you to buy them , along as you pass 'd . 
 hi face 's own margent did quot such amaz 
 that all eye saw hi eye enchant with gaze . 
 i 'll give you aquitain and all that is hi , 
 an you give him for my sake but one love kiss . 
 princess of franc . come , to our pavilion . boyet is dispo 'd . 
 boyet . but to speak that in word which hi eye hath disclo 'd ; 
 i onli have made a mouth of hi eye , 
 by ad a tongu which i know will not lie . 
 maria . thou art an old love-mong , and speakest skil . 
 katharin . he is cupid 's grandfath , and learn news of him . 
 rosalin . then wa venu like her mother ; for her father is but 
 grim . 
 boyet . do you hear , my mad wench ? 
 maria . no . 
 boyet . what , then ; do you see ? 
 maria . ay , our way to be gone . 
 boyet . you are too hard for me . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 the park 
 
 enter armado and moth 
 
 armado . warbl , child ; make passion my sens of hear . 
 [ moth sing concolinel ] 
 armado . sweet air ! go , tender of year , take thi key , give 
 enlarg to the swain , bring him festin hither ; i must 
 employ him in a letter to my love . 
 moth . master , will you win your love with a french brawl ? 
 armado . how meanest thou ? brawl in french ? 
 moth . no , my complet master ; but to jig off a tune at the tongu 's 
 end , canari to it with your feet , humour it with turn up your 
 eyelid , sigh a note and sing a note , sometim through the 
 throat , as if you swallow love with sing love , sometim 
 through the nose , as if you snuff 'd up love by smell love , 
 with your hat penthouse-lik o'er the shop of your eye , with 
 your arm cross 'd on your thin-belli doublet , like a rabbit on a 
 spit , or your hand in your pocket , like a man after the old 
 paint ; and keep not too long in one tune , but a snip and away . 
 these are complement , these are humour ; these betray nice 
 wench , that would be betray without these ; and make them men 
 of note- do you note me ? - that most are affect to these . 
 armado . how hast thou purchas thi experi ? 
 moth . by my penni of observ . 
 armado . but o- but o- 
 moth . the hobby-hors is forgot . 
 armado . call'st thou my love 'hobby-hors ' ? 
 moth . no , master ; the hobby-hors is but a colt , and your love 
 perhap a hackney . but have you forgot your love ? 
 armado . almost i had . 
 moth . neglig student ! learn her by heart . 
 armado . by heart and in heart , boy . 
 moth . and out of heart , master ; all those three i will prove . 
 armado . what wilt thou prove ? 
 moth . a man , if i live ; and thi , by , in , and without , upon the 
 instant . by heart you love her , becaus your heart can not come by 
 her ; in heart you love her , becaus your heart is in love with 
 her ; and out of heart you love her , be out of heart that you 
 can not enjoy her . 
 armado . i am all these three . 
 moth . and three time as much more , and yet noth at all . 
 armado . fetch hither the swain ; he must carri me a letter . 
 moth . a messag well sympathiz'd- a hors to be ambassador for an 
 ass . 
 armado . ha , ha , what sayest thou ? 
 moth . marri , sir , you must send the ass upon the hors , for he is 
 veri slow-gait . but i go . 
 armado . the way is but short ; away . 
 moth . as swift as lead , sir . 
 armado . the mean , pretti ingeni ? 
 is not lead a metal heavi , dull , and slow ? 
 moth . minim , honest master ; or rather , master , no . 
 armado . i say lead is slow . 
 moth . you are too swift , sir , to say so : 
 is that lead slow which is fir 'd from a gun ? 
 armado . sweet smoke of rhetor ! 
 he reput me a cannon ; and the bullet , that 's he ; 
 i shoot thee at the swain . 
 moth . thump , then , and i flee . exit 
 armado . a most acut juven ; volabl and free of grace ! 
 by thi favour , sweet welkin , i must sigh in thi face ; 
 most rude melancholi , valour give thee place . 
 my herald is return 'd . 
 
 re-ent moth with costard 
 
 moth . a wonder , master ! here 's a costard broken in a shin . 
 armado . some enigma , some riddl ; come , thi l'envoy ; begin . 
 costard . no egma , no riddl , no l'envoy ; no salv in the mail , sir . 
 o , sir , plantain , a plain plantain ; no l'envoy , no l'envoy ; no 
 salv , sir , but a plantain ! 
 armado . by virtu thou enforcest laughter ; thi silli thought , my 
 spleen ; the heav of my lung provok me to ridicul 
 smile . o , pardon me , my star ! doth the inconsider take 
 salv for l'envoy , and the word ' l'envoy ' for a salv ? 
 moth . do the wise think them other ? is not l'envoy a salv ? 
 armado . no , page ; it is an epilogu or discours to make plain 
 some obscur preced that hath tofor been sain . 
 i will exampl it : 
 the fox , the ape , and the humble-be , 
 were still at odd , be but three . 
 there 's the moral . now the l'envoy . 
 moth . i will add the l'envoy . say the moral again . 
 armado . the fox , the ape , and the humble-be , 
 were still at odd , be but three . 
 moth . until the goos came out of door , 
 and stay 'd the odd by ad four . 
 now will i begin your moral , and do you follow with my l'envoy . 
 the fox , the ape , and the humble-be , 
 were still at odd , be but three . 
 armado . until the goos came out of door , 
 stay the odd by ad four . 
 moth . a good l'envoy , end in the goos ; would you desir more ? 
 costard . the boy hath sold him a bargain , a goos , that 's flat . 
 sir , your pennyworth is good , an your goos be fat . 
 to sell a bargain well is as cun as fast and loos ; 
 let me see : a fat l'envoy ; ay , that 's a fat goos . 
 armado . come hither , come hither . how did thi argument begin ? 
 moth . by say that a costard wa broken in a shin . 
 then call 'd you for the l'envoy . 
 costard . true , and i for a plantain . thu came your argument in ; 
 then the boy 's fat l'envoy , the goos that you bought ; 
 and he end the market . 
 armado . but tell me : how wa there a costard broken in a shin ? 
 moth . i will tell you sensibl . 
 costard . thou hast no feel of it , moth ; i will speak that 
 l'envoy . 
 i , costard , run out , that wa safe within , 
 fell over the threshold and broke my shin . 
 armado . we will talk no more of thi matter . 
 costard . till there be more matter in the shin . 
 armado . sirrah costard . i will enfranchis thee . 
 costard . o , marri me to one franc ! i smell some l'envoy , some 
 goos , in thi . 
 armado . by my sweet soul , i mean set thee at liberti , 
 enfreedom thi person ; thou wert immur , restrain , 
 captiv , bound . 
 costard . true , true ; and now you will be my purgat , and let me 
 loos . 
 armado . i give thee thi liberti , set thee from duranc ; and , in 
 lieu thereof , impos on thee noth but thi : bear thi 
 signific [ give a letter ] to the countri maid jaquenetta ; 
 there is remuner , for the best ward of mine honour is 
 reward my depend . moth , follow . exit 
 moth . like the sequel , i. signior costard , adieu . 
 costard . my sweet ounc of man 's flesh , my inconi jew ! 
 exit moth 
 now will i look to hi remuner . remuner ! o , that 's the 
 latin word for three farth . three farthings- remuner . 
 'what 's the price of thi inkl ? '- 'one penni . '- 'no , i 'll give 
 you a remuner . ' whi , it carri it . remuner ! whi , it is 
 a fairer name than french crown . i will never buy and sell out of 
 thi word . 
 
 enter berown 
 
 berown . my good knave costard , exceedingli well met ! 
 costard . pray you , sir , how much carnat ribbon may a man buy for 
 a remuner ? 
 berown . what is a remuner ? 
 costard . marri , sir , halfpenni farth . 
 berown . whi , then , three-farth worth of silk . 
 costard . i thank your worship . god be wi ' you ! 
 berown . stay , slave ; i must employ thee . 
 as thou wilt win my favour , good my knave , 
 do one thing for me that i shall entreat . 
 costard . when would you have it done , sir ? 
 berown . thi afternoon . 
 costard . well , i will do it , sir ; fare you well . 
 berown . thou knowest not what it is . 
 costard . i shall know , sir , when i have done it . 
 berown . whi , villain , thou must know first . 
 costard . i will come to your worship to-morrow morn . 
 berown . it must be done thi afternoon . 
 hark , slave , it is but thi : 
 the princess come to hunt here in the park , 
 and in her train there is a gentl ladi ; 
 when tongu speak sweetli , then they name her name , 
 and rosalin they call her . ask for her , 
 and to her white hand see thou do commend 
 thi seal'd-up counsel . there 's thi guerdon ; go . 
 [ give him a shill ] 
 costard . gardon , o sweet gardon ! better than remuner ; a 
 'leven-p farth better ; most sweet gardon ! i will do it , 
 sir , in print . gardon- remuner ! exit 
 berown . and i , forsooth , in love ; i , that have been love 's whip ; 
 a veri beadl to a humor sigh ; 
 a critic , nay , a night-watch constabl ; 
 a domin pedant o'er the boy , 
 than whom no mortal so magnific ! 
 thi wimpl , whine , purblind , wayward boy , 
 thi senior-junior , giant-dwarf , dan cupid ; 
 regent of love-rhym , lord of fold arm , 
 th ' anoint sovereign of sigh and groan , 
 lieg of all loiter and malcont , 
 dread princ of placket , king of codpiec , 
 sole imper , and great gener 
 of trot paritor . o my littl heart ! 
 and i to be a corpor of hi field , 
 and wear hi colour like a tumbler 's hoop ! 
 what ! i love , i sue , i seek a wife- 
 a woman , that is like a german clock , 
 still a-repair , ever out of frame , 
 and never go aright , be a watch , 
 but be watch 'd that it may still go right ! 
 nay , to be perjur 'd , which is worst of all ; 
 and , among three , to love the worst of all , 
 a white wanton with a velvet brow , 
 with two pitch ball stuck in her face for eye ; 
 ay , and , by heaven , one that will do the deed , 
 though argu were her eunuch and her guard . 
 and i to sigh for her ! to watch for her ! 
 to pray for her ! go to ; it is a plagu 
 that cupid will impos for my neglect 
 of hi almighti dread littl might . 
 well , i will love , write , sigh , pray , sue , and groan : 
 some men must love my ladi , and some joan . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the park 
 
 enter the princess , rosalin , maria , katharin , boyet , lord , attend , 
 and a forest 
 
 princess of franc . wa that the king that spurr 'd hi hors so 
 hard 
 against the steep upris of the hill ? 
 boyet . i know not ; but i think it wa not he . 
 princess of franc . whoe'er ' a wa , ' a show 'd a mount mind . 
 well , lord , to-day we shall have our dispatch ; 
 on saturday we will return to franc . 
 then , forest , my friend , where is the bush 
 that we must stand and play the murder in ? 
 forest . herebi , upon the edg of yonder coppic ; 
 a stand where you may make the fairest shoot . 
 princess of franc . i thank my beauti i am fair that shoot , 
 and thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot . 
 forest . pardon me , madam , for i meant not so . 
 princess of franc . what , what ? first prais me , and again say no ? 
 o short-liv 'd pride ! not fair ? alack for woe ! 
 forest . ye , madam , fair . 
 princess of franc . nay , never paint me now ; 
 where fair is not , prais can not mend the brow . 
 here , good my glass , take thi for tell true : 
 [ give him money ] 
 fair payment for foul word is more than due . 
 forest . noth but fair is that which you inherit . 
 princess of franc . see , see , my beauti will be sav 'd by merit . 
 o heresi in fair , fit for these day ! 
 a give hand , though foul , shall have fair prais . 
 but come , the bow . now merci goe to kill , 
 and shoot well is then account ill ; 
 thu will i save my credit in the shoot : 
 not wound , piti would not let me do't ; 
 if wound , then it wa to show my skill , 
 that more for prais than purpos meant to kill . 
 and , out of question , so it is sometim : 
 glori grow guilti of detest crime , 
 when , for fame 's sake , for prais , an outward part , 
 we bend to that the work of the heart ; 
 as i for prais alon now seek to spill 
 the poor deer 's blood that my heart mean no ill. 
 boyet . do not curst wive hold that self-sovereignti 
 onli for prais sake , when they strive to be 
 lord o'er their lord ? 
 princess of franc . onli for prais ; and prais we may afford 
 to ani ladi that subdu a lord . 
 
 enter costard 
 
 boyet . here come a member of the commonwealth . 
 costard . god dig-you-den all ! pray you , which is the head ladi ? 
 princess of franc . thou shalt know her , fellow , by the rest that 
 have no head . 
 costard . which is the greatest ladi , the highest ? 
 princess of franc . the thickest and the tallest . 
 costard . the thickest and the tallest ! it is so ; truth is truth . 
 an your waist , mistress , were as slender as my wit , 
 one o ' these maid ' girdl for your waist should be fit . 
 are not you the chief woman ? you are the thickest here . 
 princess of franc . what 's your will , sir ? what 's your will ? 
 costard . i have a letter from monsieur berown to one 
 ladi rosalin . 
 princess of franc . o , thi letter , thi letter ! he 's a good friend 
 of mine . 
 stand asid , good bearer . boyet , you can carv . 
 break up thi capon . 
 boyet . i am bound to serv . 
 thi letter is mistook ; it importeth none here . 
 it is writ to jaquenetta . 
 princess of franc . we will read it , i swear . 
 break the neck of the wax , and everi one give ear . 
 boyet . [ read ] 'bi heaven , that thou art fair is most infal ; 
 true that thou art beauteou ; truth itself that thou art love . 
 more fairer than fair , beauti than beauteou , truer than truth 
 itself , have commiser on thi heroic vassal . the 
 magnanim and most illustr king cophetua set eye upon the 
 pernici and indubit beggar zenelophon ; and he it wa that 
 might rightli say , 'veni , vidi , vici ' ; which to annothan in 
 the vulgar , - o base and obscur vulgar ! - videlicet , he came , saw , 
 and overcam . he came , one ; saw , two ; overcam , three . who came ? - 
 the king . whi did he come ? - to see . whi did he see ? -to overcom . 
 to whom came he ? - to the beggar . what saw he ? - the beggar . who 
 overcam he ? - the beggar . the conclus is victori ; on whose 
 side ? - the king 's . the captiv is enrich 'd ; on whose side ? - the 
 beggar 's . the catastroph is a nuptial ; on whose side ? - the 
 king 's . no , on both in one , or one in both . i am the king , for so 
 stand the comparison ; thou the beggar , for so witnesseth thi 
 lowli . shall i command thi love ? i may . shall i enforc thi 
 love ? i could . shall i entreat thi love ? i will . what shalt thou 
 exchang for rag ? - robe , for tittl ? - titl , for thyself ? 
 -me . thu expect thi repli , i profan my lip on thi foot , my 
 eye on thi pictur , and my heart on thi everi part . 
 thine in the dearest design of industri , 
 don adriano de armado . 
 
 'thu dost thou hear the nemean lion roar 
 'gainst thee , thou lamb , that standest as hi prey ; 
 submiss fall hi princ feet befor , 
 and he from forag will inclin to play . 
 but if thou strive , poor soul , what are thou then ? 
 food for hi rage , repastur for hi den . ' 
 princess of franc . what plume of feather is he that indit thi 
 letter ? 
 what vane ? what weathercock ? did you ever hear better ? 
 boyet . i am much deceiv but i rememb the style . 
 princess of franc . els your memori is bad , go o'er it 
 erewhil . 
 boyet . thi armado is a spaniard , that keep here in court ; 
 a phantasim , a monarcho , and one that make sport 
 to the princ and hi book-mat . 
 princess of franc . thou fellow , a word . 
 who gave thee thi letter ? 
 costard . i told you : my lord . 
 princess of franc . to whom shouldst thou give it ? 
 costard . from my lord to my ladi . 
 princess of franc . from which lord to which ladi ? 
 costard . from my lord berown , a good master of mine , 
 to a ladi of franc that he call 'd rosalin . 
 princess of franc . thou hast mistaken hi letter . come , lord , 
 away . 
 [ to rosalin ] here , sweet , put up thi ; 'twill be thine anoth 
 day . exeunt princess and train 
 boyet . who is the shooter ? who is the shooter ? 
 rosalin . shall i teach you to know ? 
 boyet . ay , my contin of beauti . 
 rosalin . whi , she that bear the bow . 
 fine put off ! 
 boyet . my ladi goe to kill horn ; but , if thou marri , 
 hang me by the neck , if horn that year miscarri . 
 fine put on ! 
 rosalin . well then , i am the shooter . 
 boyet . and who is your deer ? 
 rosalin . if we choos by the horn , yourself come not near . 
 fine put on inde ! 
 maria . you still wrangl with her , boyet , and she strike at the 
 brow . 
 boyet . but she herself is hit lower . have i hit her now ? 
 rosalin . shall i come upon thee with an old say , that wa a man 
 when king pepin of franc wa a littl boy , as touch the hit 
 it ? 
 boyet . so i may answer thee with one as old , that wa a woman when 
 queen guinev of britain wa a littl wench , as touch the hit 
 it . 
 rosalin . [ sing ] 
 thou canst not hit it , hit it , hit it , 
 thou canst not hit it , my good man . 
 boyet . an i can not , can not , can not , 
 an i can not , anoth can . 
 exeunt rosalin and katharin 
 costard . by my troth , most pleasant ! how both did fit it ! 
 maria . a mark marvel well shot ; for they both did hit it . 
 boyet . a mark ! o , mark but that mark ! a mark , say my ladi ! 
 let the mark have a prick i n't , to mete at , if it may be . 
 maria . wide o ' the bow-hand ! i ' faith , your hand is out . 
 costard . inde , ' a must shoot nearer , or he 'll ne'er hit the 
 clout . 
 boyet . an if my hand be out , then belik your hand is in . 
 costard . then will she get the upshoot by cleav the pin . 
 maria . come , come , you talk greasili ; your lip grow foul . 
 costard . she 's too hard for you at prick , sir ; challeng her to 
 bowl . 
 boyet . i fear too much rub ; good-night , my good owl . 
 exeunt boyet and maria 
 costard . by my soul , a swain , a most simpl clown ! 
 lord , lord ! how the ladi and i have put him down ! 
 o ' my troth , most sweet jest , most inconi vulgar wit ! 
 when it come so smoothli off , so obscen , as it were , so fit . 
 armado a th ' t'one side- o , a most dainti man ! 
 to see him walk befor a ladi and to bear her fan ! 
 to see him kiss hi hand , and how most sweetli ' a will swear ! 
 and hi page a t ' other side , that hand of wit ! 
 ah , heaven , it is a most pathet nit ! 
 sola , sola ! exit costard 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the park 
 
 from the shoot within , enter holofern , sir nathaniel , and dull 
 
 nathaniel . veri rever sport , truli ; and done in the testimoni of 
 a good conscienc . 
 holofern . the deer wa , as you know , sangui , in blood ; ripe as 
 the pomewat , who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo , 
 the sky , the welkin , the heaven ; and anon falleth like a crab on 
 the face of terra , the soil , the land , the earth . 
 nathaniel . truli , master holofern , the epithet are sweetli 
 vari , like a scholar at the least ; but , sir , i assur ye it wa 
 a buck of the first head . 
 holofern . sir nathaniel , haud credo . 
 dull . 't wa not a haud credo ; 't wa a pricket . 
 holofern . most barbar intim ! yet a kind of insinu , 
 as it were , in via , in way , of explic ; facer , as it were , 
 replic , or rather , ostentar , to show , as it were , hi 
 inclin , after hi undress , unpolish , uneduc , 
 unprun , untrain , or rather unlett , or ratherest 
 unconfirm fashion , to insert again my haud credo for a deer . 
 dull . i said the deer wa not a haud credo ; 't wa a pricket . 
 holofern . twice-sod simplic , bi coctu ! 
 o thou monster ignor , how deform dost thou look ! 
 nathaniel . sir , he hath never fed of the dainti that are bred in 
 a book ; 
 he hath not eat paper , as it were ; he hath not drunk ink ; hi 
 intellect is not replenish ; he is onli an anim , onli sensibl 
 in the duller part ; 
 and such barren plant are set befor us that we thank should 
 be- 
 which we of tast and feel are- for those part that do 
 fructifi in us more than he . 
 for as it would ill becom me to be vain , indiscreet , or a fool , 
 so , were there a patch set on learn , to see him in a school . 
 but , omn bene , say i , be of an old father 's mind : 
 mani can brook the weather that love not the wind . 
 dull . you two are book-men : can you tell me by your wit 
 what wa a month old at cain 's birth that 's not five week old as 
 yet ? 
 holofern . dictynna , goodman dull ; dictynna , goodman dull . 
 dull . what is dictynna ? 
 nathaniel . a titl to phoeb , to luna , to the moon . 
 holofern . the moon wa a month old when adam wa no more , 
 and raught not to five week when he came to five-scor . 
 th ' allus hold in the exchang . 
 dull . 't is true , inde ; the collus hold in the exchang . 
 holofern . god comfort thi capac ! i say th ' allus hold in 
 the exchang . 
 dull . and i say the polus hold in the exchang ; for the moon is 
 never but a month old ; and i say , besid , that 't wa a pricket 
 that the princess kill 'd . 
 holofern . sir nathaniel , will you hear an extempor epitaph on 
 the death of the deer ? and , to humour the ignor , call the deer 
 the princess kill 'd a pricket . 
 nathaniel . perg , good master holofern , perg , so it shall pleas 
 you to abrog scurril . 
 holofern . i will someth affect the letter , for it argu 
 facil . 
 
 the prey princess pierc 'd and prick 'd a pretti pleas 
 pricket . 
 some say a sore ; but not a sore till now made sore with shoot . 
 the dog did yell ; put el to sore , then sorel jump from thicket- 
 or pricket sore , or els sorel ; the peopl fall a-hoot . 
 if sore be sore , then l to sore make fifti sore o ' sorel . 
 of one sore i an hundr make by ad but one more l. 
 
 nathaniel . a rare talent ! 
 dull . [ asid ] if a talent be a claw , look how he claw him with a 
 talent . 
 holofern . thi is a gift that i have , simpl , simpl ; a foolish 
 extravag spirit , full of form , figur , shape , object , 
 idea , apprehens , motion , revolut . these are begot in 
 the ventricl of memori , nourish 'd in the womb of pia mater , and 
 deliv upon the mellow of occas . but the gift is good in 
 those in whom it is acut , and i am thank for it . 
 nathaniel . sir , i prais the lord for you , and so may my 
 parishion ; for their son are well tutor 'd by you , and their 
 daughter profit veri greatli under you . you are a good member of 
 the commonwealth . 
 holofern . mehercl , if their son be ingeni , they shall want 
 no instruct ; if their daughter be capabl , i will put it to 
 them ; but , vir sapit qui pauca loquitur . a soul feminin saluteth 
 us . 
 
 enter jaquenetta and costard 
 
 jaquenetta . god give you good morrow , master person . 
 holofern . master person , quasi pers-on . and if one should be 
 pierc 'd which is the one ? 
 costard . marri , master schoolmast , he that is likest to a 
 hogshead . 
 holofern . pierc a hogshead ! a good lustr of conceit in a turf 
 of earth ; fire enough for a flint , pearl enough for a swine ; 't is 
 pretti ; it is well . 
 jaquenetta . good master parson , be so good as read me thi letter ; 
 it wa given me by costard , and sent me from don armado . i 
 beseech you read it . 
 holofern . faust , precor gelida quando pecu omn sub umbra 
 ruminat- 
 and so forth . ah , good old mantuan ! i may speak of thee as 
 the travel doth of venic : 
 venetia , venetia , 
 chi non ti vede , non ti pretia . 
 old mantuan , old mantuan ! who understandeth thee not , 
 love thee not- 
 ut , re , sol , la , mi , fa . 
 under pardon , sir , what are the content ? or rather as 
 horac say in his- what , my soul , vers ? 
 nathaniel . ay , sir , and veri learn . 
 holofern . let me hear a staff , a stanz , a vers ; lege , domin . 
 nathaniel . [ read ] 'if love make me forsworn , how shall i swear to 
 love ? 
 ah , never faith could hold , if not to beauti vow ! 
 though to myself forsworn , to thee i 'll faith prove ; 
 those thought to me were oak , to thee like osier bow . 
 studi hi bia leav , and make hi book thine eye , 
 where all those pleasur live that art would comprehend . 
 if knowledg be the mark , to know thee shall suffic ; 
 well learn is that tongu that well can thee commend ; 
 all ignor that soul that see thee without wonder ; 
 which is to me some prais that i thi part admir . 
 thi eye jove 's lightn bear , thi voic hi dread thunder , 
 which , not to anger bent , is music and sweet fire . 
 celesti as thou art , o , pardon love thi wrong , 
 that sing heaven 's prais with such an earthli tongu . ' 
 holofern . you find not the apostropha , and so miss the accent : 
 let me supervis the canzonet . here are onli number ratifi ; 
 but , for the eleg , facil , and golden cadenc of poesi , 
 caret . ovidiu naso wa the man . and whi , inde , 'naso ' but for 
 smell out the odorifer flower of fanci , the jerk of 
 invent ? imitari is noth : so doth the hound hi master , the 
 ape hi keeper , the tire hors hi rider . but , damosella virgin , 
 wa thi direct to you ? 
 jaquenetta . ay , sir , from one monsieur berown , one of the strang 
 queen 's lord . 
 holofern . i will overgl the superscript : 'to the snow-whit 
 hand of the most beauteou ladi rosalin . ' i will look again on 
 the intellect of the letter , for the nomin of the parti 
 write to the person written unto : 'your ladyship 's in all 
 desir employ , berown . ' sir nathaniel , thi berown is one 
 of the votari with the king ; and here he hath frame a letter 
 to a sequent of the stranger queen 's which accident , or by 
 the way of progress , hath miscarri . trip and go , my sweet ; 
 deliv thi paper into the royal hand of the king ; it may 
 concern much . stay not thi compliment ; i forgiv thi duti . adieu . 
 jaquenetta . good costard , go with me . sir , god save your life ! 
 costard . have with thee , my girl . 
 exeunt costard and jaquenetta 
 nathaniel . sir , you have done thi in the fear of god , veri 
 religi ; and , as a certain father saith- 
 holofern . sir , tell not me of the father ; i do fear colour 
 colour . but to return to the vers : did they pleas you , sir 
 nathaniel ? 
 nathaniel . marvel well for the pen . 
 holofern . i do dine to-day at the father 's of a certain pupil of 
 mine ; where , if , befor repast , it shall pleas you to gratifi 
 the tabl with a grace , i will , on my privileg i have with the 
 parent of the foresaid child or pupil , undertak your ben 
 venuto ; where i will prove those vers to be veri unlearn , 
 neither savour of poetri , wit , nor invent . i beseech your 
 societi . 
 nathaniel . and thank you too ; for societi , saith the text , is the 
 happi of life . 
 holofern . and cert , the text most infal conclud it . 
 [ to dull ] sir , i do invit you too ; you shall not say me nay : 
 pauca verba . away ; the gentl are at their game , and we will to 
 our recreat . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the park 
 
 enter berown , with a paper hi band , alon 
 
 berown . the king he is hunt the deer : i am cours myself . 
 they have pitch 'd a toil : i am toll in a pitch- pitch that 
 defil . defil ! a foul word . well , 'set thee down , sorrow ! ' for 
 so they say the fool said , and so say i , and i am the fool . well 
 prove , wit . by the lord , thi love is as mad as ajax : it kill 
 sheep ; it kill me- i a sheep . well prove again o ' my side . i 
 will not love ; if i do , hang me . i ' faith , i will not . o , but her 
 eye ! by thi light , but for her eye , i would not love her- ye , 
 for her two eye . well , i do noth in the world but lie , and 
 lie in my throat . by heaven , i do love ; and it hath taught me to 
 rhyme , and to be melancholi ; and here is part of my rhyme , and 
 here my melancholi . well , she hath one o ' my sonnet alreadi ; the 
 clown bore it , the fool sent it , and the ladi hath it : sweet 
 clown , sweeter fool , sweetest ladi ! by the world , i would not 
 care a pin if the other three were in . here come one with a 
 paper ; god give him grace to groan ! 
 [ climb into a tree ] 
 
 enter the king , with a paper 
 
 king . ay me ! 
 berown . shot , by heaven ! proceed , sweet cupid ; thou hast thump 'd 
 him with thi bird-bolt under the left pap . in faith , secret ! 
 king . [ read ] 
 'so sweet a kiss the golden sun give not 
 to those fresh morn drop upon the rose , 
 as thi eye-beam , when their fresh ray have smote 
 the night of dew that on my cheek down flow ; 
 nor shine the silver moon one half so bright 
 through the transpar bosom of the deep , 
 as doth thi face through tear of mine give light . 
 thou shin'st in everi tear that i do weep ; 
 no drop but as a coach doth carri thee ; 
 so ridest thou triumph in my woe . 
 do but behold the tear that swell in me , 
 and they thi glori through my grief will show . 
 but do not love thyself ; then thou wilt keep 
 my tear for glass , and still make me weep . 
 o queen of queen ! how far dost thou excel 
 no thought can think nor tongu of mortal tell . ' 
 how shall she know my grief ? i 'll drop the paper- 
 sweet leav , shade folli . who is he come here ? 
 [ step asid ] 
 
 enter longavil , with a paper 
 
 what , longavil , and read ! listen , car . 
 berown . now , in thi like , one more fool appear ! 
 longavil . ay me , i am forsworn ! 
 berown . whi , he come in like a perjur , wear paper . 
 king . in love , i hope ; sweet fellowship in shame ! 
 berown . one drunkard love anoth of the name . 
 longavil . am i the first that have been perjur 'd so ? 
 berown . i could put thee in comfort : not by two that i know ; 
 thou makest the triumviri , the corner-cap of societi , 
 the shape of love 's tyburn that hang up simplic . 
 longavil . i fear these stubborn line lack power to move . 
 o sweet maria , empress of my love ! 
 these number will i tear , and write in prose . 
 berown . o , rhyme are guard on wanton cupid 's hose : 
 disfigur not hi slop . 
 longavil . thi same shall go . [ he read the sonnet ] 
 'did not the heavenli rhetor of thine eye , 
 'gainst whom the world can not hold argument , 
 persuad my heart to thi fals perjuri ? 
 vow for thee broke deserv not punish . 
 a woman i forswor ; but i will prove , 
 thou be a goddess , i forswor not thee : 
 my vow wa earthli , thou a heavenli love ; 
 thi grace be gain 'd cure all disgrac in me . 
 vow are but breath , and breath a vapour is ; 
 then thou , fair sun , which on my earth dost shine , 
 exhal'st thi vapour-vow ; in thee it is . 
 if broken , then it is no fault of mine ; 
 if by me broke , what fool is not so wise 
 to lose an oath to win a paradis ? ' 
 berown . thi is the liver-vein , which make flesh a deiti , 
 a green goos a goddess- pure , pure idolatri . 
 god amend us , god amend ! we are much out o ' th ' way . 
 
 enter dumain , with a paper 
 
 longavil . by whom shall i send thi ? - compani ! stay . 
 [ step asid ] 
 berown . 'all hid , all hid'- an old infant play . 
 like a demigod here sit i in the sky , 
 and wretch fool ' secret heed o'er-ey . 
 more sack to the mill ! o heaven , i have my wish ! 
 dumain transform ! four woodcock in a dish ! 
 dumain . o most divin kate ! 
 berown . o most profan coxcomb ! 
 dumain . by heaven , the wonder in a mortal eye ! 
 berown . by earth , she is not , corpor : there you lie . 
 dumain . her amber hair for foul hath amber quot . 
 berown . an amber-colour 'd raven wa well note . 
 dumain . as upright as the cedar . 
 berown . stoop , i say ; 
 her shoulder is with child . 
 dumain . as fair as day . 
 berown . ay , as some day ; but then no sun must shine . 
 dumain . o that i had my wish ! 
 longavil . and i had mine ! 
 king . and i mine too , .good lord ! 
 berown . amen , so i had mine ! is not that a good word ? 
 dumain . i would forget her ; but a fever she 
 reign in my blood , and will rememb'r be . 
 berown . a fever in your blood ? whi , then incis 
 would let her out in saucer . sweet mispris ! 
 dumain . onc more i 'll read the ode that i have writ . 
 berown . onc more i 'll mark how love can vari wit . 
 dumain . [ read ] 
 'on a day-alack the day ! - 
 love , whose month is ever may , 
 spi a blossom pass fair 
 play in the wanton air . 
 through the velvet leav the wind , 
 all unseen , can passag find ; 
 that the lover , sick to death , 
 wish 'd himself the heaven 's breath . 
 `` air , '' quoth he `` thi cheek may blow ; 
 air , would i might triumph so ! 
 but , alack , my hand is sworn 
 ne'er to pluck thee from thi thorn ; 
 vow , alack , for youth unmeet , 
 youth so apt to pluck a sweet . 
 do not call it sin in me 
 that i am forsworn for thee ; 
 thou for whom jove would swear 
 juno but an ethiop were ; 
 and deni himself for jove , 
 turn mortal for thi love . '' ' 
 thi will i send ; and someth els more plain 
 that shall express my true love 's fast pain . 
 o , would the king , berown and longavil , 
 were lover too ! ill , to exampl ill , 
 would from my forehead wipe a perjur 'd note ; 
 for none offend where all alik do dote . 
 longavil . [ advanc ] dumain , thi love is far from chariti , 
 that in love 's grief desir'st societi ; 
 you may look pale , but i should blush , i know , 
 to be o'erheard and taken nap so . 
 king . [ advanc ] come , sir , you blush ; as hi , your case is such . 
 you chide at him , offend twice as much : 
 you do not love maria ! longavil 
 did never sonnet for her sake compil ; 
 nor never lay hi wreath arm athwart 
 hi love bosom , to keep down hi heart . 
 i have been close shroud in thi bush , 
 and mark 'd you both , and for you both did blush . 
 i heard your guilti rhyme , observ 'd your fashion , 
 saw sigh reek from you , note well your passion . 
 'ay me ! ' say one . ' o jove ! ' the other cri . 
 one , her hair were gold ; crystal the other 's eye . 
 [ to longavil ] you would for paradis break faith and troth ; 
 [ to dumain ] and jove for your love would infring an oath . 
 what will berown say when that he shall hear 
 faith infring which such zeal did swear ? 
 how will he scorn , how will he spend hi wit ! 
 how will he triumph , leap , and laugh at it ! 
 for all the wealth that ever i did see , 
 i would not have him know so much by me . 
 berown . [ descend ] now step i forth to whip hypocrisi , 
 ah , good my lieg , i pray thee pardon me . 
 good heart , what grace hast thou thu to reprov 
 these worm for love , that art most in love ? 
 your eye do make no coach ; in your tear 
 there is no certain princess that appear ; 
 you 'll not be perjur 'd ; 't is a hate thing ; 
 tush , none but minstrel like of sonnet . 
 but are you not asham ? nay , are you not , 
 all three of you , to be thu much o'ershot ? 
 you found hi mote ; the king your mote did see ; 
 but i a beam do find in each of three . 
 o , what a scene of fool'ri have i seen , 
 of sigh , of groan , of sorrow , and of teen ! 
 o , me , with what strict patienc have i sat , 
 to see a king transform to a gnat ! 
 to see great hercul whip a gig , 
 and profound solomon to tune a jig , 
 and nestor play at push-pin with the boy , 
 and critic timon laugh at idl toy ! 
 where lie thi grief , o , tell me , good dumain ? 
 and , gentl longavil , where lie thi pain ? 
 and where my lieg 's ? all about the breast . 
 a caudl , ho ! 
 king . too bitter is thi jest . 
 are we betray thu to thi over-view ? 
 berown . not you by me , but i betray to you . 
 i that am honest , i that hold it sin 
 to break the vow i am engag in ; 
 i am betray by keep compani 
 with men like you , men of inconst . 
 when shall you see me write a thing in rhyme ? 
 or groan for joan ? or spend a minut 's time 
 in prune me ? when shall you hear that i 
 will prais a hand , a foot , a face , an eye , 
 a gait , a state , a brow , a breast , a waist , 
 a leg , a limb- 
 king . soft ! whither away so fast ? 
 a true man or a thief that gallop so ? 
 berown . i post from love ; good lover , let me go . 
 
 enter jaquenetta and costard 
 
 jaquenetta . god bless the king ! 
 king . what present hast thou there ? 
 costard . some certain treason . 
 king . what make treason here ? 
 costard . nay , it make noth , sir . 
 king . if it mar noth neither , 
 the treason and you go in peac away togeth . 
 jaquenetta . i beseech your grace , let thi letter be read ; 
 our person misdoubt it : 't wa treason , he said . 
 king . berown , read it over . [ berown read the letter ] 
 where hadst thou it ? 
 jaquenetta . of costard . 
 king . where hadst thou it ? 
 costard . of dun adramadio , dun adramadio . 
 [ berown tear the letter ] 
 king . how now ! what is in you ? whi dost thou tear it ? 
 berown . a toy , my lieg , a toy ! your grace need not fear it . 
 longavil . it did move him to passion , and therefor let 's hear 
 it . 
 dumain . it is berown 's write , and here is hi name . 
 [ gather up the piec ] 
 berown . [ to costard ] ah , you whoreson loggerhead , you were born 
 to do me shame . 
 guilti , my lord , guilti ! i confess , i confess . 
 king . what ? 
 berown . that you three fool lack 'd me fool to make up the mess ; 
 he , he , and you- and you , my lieg ! - and i 
 are pick-purs in love , and we deserv to die . 
 o , dismiss thi audienc , and i shall tell you more . 
 dumain . now the number is even . 
 berown . true , true , we are four . 
 will these turtl be gone ? 
 king . henc , sir , away . 
 costard . walk asid the true folk , and let the traitor stay . 
 exeunt costard and jaquenetta 
 berown . sweet lord , sweet lover , o , let us embrac ! 
 as true we are as flesh and blood can be . 
 the sea will ebb and flow , heaven show hi face ; 
 young blood doth not obey an old decre . 
 we can not cross the caus whi we were born , 
 therefor of all hand must we be forsworn . 
 king . what , did these rent line show some love of thine ? 
 berown . 'did they ? ' quoth you . who see the heavenli rosalin 
 that , like a rude and savag man of ind 
 at the first op'n of the gorgeou east , 
 bow not hi vassal head and , strucken blind , 
 kiss the base ground with obedi breast ? 
 what peremptori eagle-sight eye 
 dare look upon the heaven of her brow 
 that is not blind by her majesti ? 
 king . what zeal , what furi hath inspir 'd thee now ? 
 my love , her mistress , is a graciou moon ; 
 she , an attend star , scarc seen a light . 
 berown . my eye are then no eye , nor i berown . 
 o , but for my love , day would turn to night ! 
 of all complexion the cull 'd sovereignti 
 do meet , as at a fair , in her fair cheek , 
 where sever worthi make one digniti , 
 where noth want that want itself doth seek . 
 lend me the flourish of all gentl tongues- 
 fie , paint rhetor ! o , she need it not ! 
 to thing of sale a seller 's prais belong : 
 she pass prais ; then prais too short doth blot . 
 a wither 'd hermit , five-scor winter worn , 
 might shake off fifti , look in her eye . 
 beauti doth varnish age , as if new-born , 
 and give the crutch the cradl 's infanc . 
 o , 't is the sun that maketh all thing shine ! 
 king . by heaven , thi love is black as eboni . 
 berown . is eboni like her ? o wood divin ! 
 a wife of such wood were felic . 
 o , who can give an oath ? where is a book ? 
 that i may swear beauti doth beauti lack , 
 if that she learn not of her eye to look . 
 no face is fair that is not full so black . 
 king . o paradox ! black is the badg of hell , 
 the hue of dungeon , and the school of night ; 
 and beauti 's crest becom the heaven well . 
 berown . devil soonest tempt , resembl spirit of light . 
 o , if in black my ladi 's brow be deckt , 
 it mourn that paint and usurp hair 
 should ravish doter with a fals aspect ; 
 and therefor is she born to make black fair . 
 her favour turn the fashion of the day ; 
 for nativ blood is count paint now ; 
 and therefor red that would avoid disprais 
 paint itself black , to imit her brow . 
 dumain . to look like her are chimney-sweep black . 
 longavil . and sinc her time are collier count bright . 
 king . and ethiop of their sweet complexion crack . 
 dumain . dark need no candl now , for dark is light . 
 berown . your mistress dare never come in rain 
 for fear their colour should be wash 'd away . 
 king . 'twere good your did ; for , sir , to tell you plain , 
 i 'll find a fairer face not wash 'd to-day . 
 berown . i 'll prove her fair , or talk till doomsday here . 
 king . no devil will fright thee then so much as she . 
 dumain . i never knew man hold vile stuff so dear . 
 longavil . look , here 's thi love : my foot and her face see . 
 [ show hi shoe ] 
 berown . o , if the street were pave with thine eye , 
 her feet were much too dainti for such tread ! 
 dumain . o vile ! then , as she goe , what upward lie 
 the street should see as she walk 'd overhead . 
 king . but what of thi ? are we not all in love ? 
 berown . noth so sure ; and therebi all forsworn . 
 king . then leav thi chat ; and , good berown , now prove 
 our love law , and our faith not torn . 
 dumain . ay , marri , there ; some flatteri for thi evil . 
 longavil . o , some author how to proceed ; 
 some trick , some quillet , how to cheat the devil ! 
 dumain . some salv for perjuri . 
 berown . 't is more than need . 
 have at you , then , affect 's men-at-arm . 
 consid what you first did swear unto : 
 to fast , to studi , and to see no woman- 
 flat treason 'gainst the kingli state of youth . 
 say , can you fast ? your stomach are too young , 
 and abstin engend maladi . 
 and , where that you you have vow 'd to studi , lord , 
 in that each of you have forsworn hi book , 
 can you still dream , and pore , and thereon look ? 
 for when would you , my lord , or you , or you , 
 have found the ground of studi 's excel 
 without the beauti of a woman 's face ? 
 from women 's eye thi doctrin i deriv : 
 they are the ground , the book , the academ , 
 from whenc doth spring the true promethean fire . 
 whi , univers plod poison up 
 the nimbl spirit in the arteri , 
 as motion and long-dur action tire 
 the sinewi vigour of the travel . 
 now , for not look on a woman 's face , 
 you have in that forsworn the use of eye , 
 and studi too , the causer of your vow ; 
 for where is author in the world 
 teach such beauti as a woman 's eye ? 
 learn is but an adjunct to ourself , 
 and where we are our learn likewis is ; 
 then when ourselv we see in ladi ' eye , 
 with ourselv . 
 do we not likewis see our learn there ? 
 o , we have made a vow to studi , lord , 
 and in that vow we have forsworn our book . 
 for when would you , my lieg , or you , or you , 
 in leaden contempl have found out 
 such fieri number as the prompt eye 
 of beauti 's tutor have enrich 'd you with ? 
 other slow art entir keep the brain ; 
 and therefor , find barren practis , 
 scarc show a harvest of their heavi toil ; 
 but love , first learn in a ladi 's eye , 
 live not alon immur in the brain , 
 but with the motion of all element 
 cours as swift as thought in everi power , 
 and give to everi power a doubl power , 
 abov their function and their offic . 
 it add a preciou see to the eye : 
 a lover 's eye will gaze an eagl blind . 
 a lover 's ear will hear the lowest sound , 
 when the suspici head of theft is stopp 'd . 
 love 's feel is more soft and sensibl 
 than are the tender horn of cockl snail : 
 love 's tongu prove dainti bacchu gross in tast . 
 for valour , is not love a hercul , 
 still climb tree in the hesperid ? 
 subtl as sphinx ; as sweet and music 
 as bright apollo 's lute , strung with hi hair . 
 and when love speak , the voic of all the god 
 make heaven drowsi with the harmoni . 
 never durst poet touch a pen to write 
 until hi ink were temp'r with love 's sigh ; 
 o , then hi line would ravish savag ear , 
 and plant in tyrant mild humil . 
 from women 's eye thi doctrin i deriv . 
 they sparkl still the right promethean fire ; 
 they are the book , the art , the academ , 
 that show , contain , and nourish , all the world , 
 els none at all in aught prove excel . 
 then fool you were these women to forswear ; 
 or , keep what is sworn , you will prove fool . 
 for wisdom 's sake , a word that all men love ; 
 or for love 's sake , a word that love all men ; 
 or for men 's sake , the author of these women ; 
 or women 's sake , by whom we men are men- 
 let us onc lose our oath to find ourselv , 
 or els we lose ourselv to keep our oath . 
 it is religion to be thu forsworn ; 
 for chariti itself fulfil the law , 
 and who can sever love from chariti ? 
 king . saint cupid , then ! and , soldier , to the field ! 
 berown . advanc your standard , and upon them , lord ; 
 pell-mel , down with them ! be first advi 'd , 
 in conflict , that you get the sun of them . 
 longavil . now to plain-deal ; lay these gloze by . 
 shall we resolv to woo these girl of franc ? 
 king . and win them too ; therefor let us devis 
 some entertain for them in their tent . 
 berown . first , from the park let us conduct them thither ; 
 then homeward everi man attach the hand 
 of hi fair mistress . in the afternoon 
 we will with some strang pastim solac them , 
 such as the short of the time can shape ; 
 for revel , danc , mask , and merri hour , 
 forerun fair love , strew her way with flower . 
 king . away , away ! no time shall be omit 
 that will betim , and may by us be fit . 
 berown . allon ! allon ! sow 'd cockl reap 'd no corn , 
 and justic alway whirl in equal measur . 
 light wench may prove plagu to men forsworn ; 
 if so , our copper buy no better treasur . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the park 
 
 enter holofern , sir nathaniel , and dull 
 
 holofern . sati quod sufficit . 
 nathaniel . i prais god for you , sir . your reason at dinner have 
 been sharp and sententi ; pleasant without scurril , witti 
 without affect , audaci without impud , learn without 
 opinion , and strang without heresi . i did convers thi quondam 
 day with a companion of the king 's who is intitul , nomin , 
 or call , don adriano de armado . 
 holofern . novi hominem tanquam te . hi humour is lofti , hi 
 discours peremptori , hi tongu file , hi eye ambiti , hi 
 gait majest and hi gener behaviour vain , ridicul , and 
 thrason . he is too pick , too spruce , too affect , too odd , 
 as it were , too peregrin , as i may call it . 
 nathaniel . a most singular and choic epithet . 
 [ draw out hi table-book ] 
 holofern . he draweth out the thread of hi verbos finer than 
 the stapl of hi argument . i abhor such fanat phantasim , 
 such insoci and point-devis companion ; such racker of 
 orthographi , as to speak 'dout ' fine , when he should say 'doubt ' ; 
 'det ' when he should pronounc 'debt'- d , e , b , t , not d , e , t. 
 he clepeth a calf 'cauf , ' half 'hauf ' ; neighbour vocatur 
 'nebour ' ; 'neigh ' abbrevi 'ne . ' thi is abhominable- which he 
 would call 'abbomin . ' it insinuateth me of insani : ne 
 intelligi , domin ? to make frantic , lunat . 
 nathaniel . lau deo , bone intelligo . 
 holofern . 'bone ' ? - 'bone ' for 'bene . ' priscian a littl 
 scratch 'd ; 'twill serv . 
 
 enter armado , moth , and costard 
 
 nathaniel . videsn qui venit ? 
 holofern . video , et gaudeo . 
 armado . [ to moth ] chirrah ! 
 holofern . quar 'chirrah , ' not 'sirrah ' ? 
 armado . men of peac , well encount'r . 
 holofern . most militari sir , salut . 
 moth . [ asid to costard ] they have been at a great feast of 
 languag and stol'n the scrap . 
 costard . o , they have liv 'd long on the alms-basket of word . i 
 marvel thi master hath not eaten thee for a word , for thou are 
 not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibu ; thou art 
 easier swallow than a flap-dragon . 
 moth . peac ! the peal begin . 
 armado . [ to holofern ] monsieur , are you not lett'r ? 
 moth . ye , ye ; he teach boy the hornbook . what is a , b , spelt 
 backward with the horn on hi head ? 
 holofern . ba , pueritia , with a horn ad . 
 moth . ba , most silli sheep with a horn . you hear hi learn . 
 holofern . qui , qui , thou conson ? 
 moth . the third of the five vowel , if you repeat them ; or the 
 fifth , if i . 
 holofern . i will repeat them : a , e , i- 
 moth . the sheep ; the other two conclud it : o , u . 
 armado . now , by the salt wave of the mediterraneum , a sweet touch , 
 a quick venu of wit- snip , snap , quick and home . it rejoiceth my 
 intellect . true wit ! 
 moth . offer 'd by a child to an old man ; which is wit-old . 
 holofern . what is the figur ? what is the figur ? 
 moth . horn . 
 holofern . thou disput like an infant ; go whip thi gig . 
 moth . lend me your horn to make one , and i will whip about your 
 infami circum circa- a gig of a cuckold 's horn . 
 costard . an i had but one penni in the world , thou shouldst have it 
 to buy ginger-bread . hold , there is the veri remuner i had 
 of thi master , thou halfpenni purs of wit , thou pigeon-egg of 
 discret . o , an the heaven were so pleas that thou wert but 
 my bastard , what a joy father wouldst thou make me ! go to ; 
 thou hast it ad dunghil , at the finger ' end , as they say . 
 holofern . o , i smell fals latin ; 'dunghil ' for unguem . 
 armado . arts-man , preambul ; we will be singul from the 
 barbar . do you not educ youth at the charge-hous on the 
 top of the mountain ? 
 holofern . or mon , the hill . 
 armado . at your sweet pleasur , for the mountain . 
 holofern . i do , san question . 
 armado . sir , it is the king 's most sweet pleasur and affect to 
 congratul the princess at her pavilion , in the posterior of 
 thi day ; which the rude multitud call the afternoon . 
 holofern . the posterior of the day , most gener sir , is liabl , 
 congruent , and measur , for the afternoon . the word is well 
 cull 'd , chose , sweet , and apt , i do assur you , sir , i do assur . 
 armado . sir , the king is a nobl gentleman , and my familiar , i do 
 assur ye , veri good friend . for what is inward between us , let 
 it pass . i do beseech thee , rememb thi courtesi . i beseech 
 thee , apparel thi head . and among other importun and most 
 seriou design , and of great import inde , too- but let that 
 pass ; for i must tell thee it will pleas hi grace , by the 
 world , sometim to lean upon my poor shoulder , and with hi royal 
 finger thu dalli with my excrement , with my mustachio ; but , 
 sweet heart , let that pass . by the world , i recount no fabl : 
 some certain special honour it pleaseth hi great to impart 
 to armado , a soldier , a man of travel , that hath seen the world ; 
 but let that pass . the veri all of all is- but , sweet heart , i do 
 implor secrecy- that the king would have me present the 
 princess , sweet chuck , with some delight ostent , or show , 
 or pageant , or antic , or firework . now , understand that the 
 curat and your sweet self are good at such erupt and sudden 
 breaking-out of mirth , as it were , i have acquaint you withal , 
 to the end to crave your assist . 
 holofern . sir , you shall present befor her the nine worthi . 
 sir nathaniel , as concern some entertain of time , some 
 show in the posterior of thi day , to be rend'r by our 
 assist , the king 's command , and thi most gallant , 
 illustr , and learn gentleman , befor the princess- i say 
 none so fit as to present the nine worthi . 
 nathaniel . where will you find men worthi enough to present them ? 
 holofern . joshua , yourself ; myself , alexand ; thi gallant 
 gentleman , juda maccabaeu ; thi swain , becaus of hi great 
 limb or joint , shall pass pompey the great ; the page , hercul . 
 armado . pardon , sir ; error : he is not quantiti enough for that 
 worthi 's thumb ; he is not so big as the end of hi club . 
 holofern . shall i have audienc ? he shall present hercul in 
 minor : hi enter and exit shall be strangl a snake ; and i 
 will have an apolog for that purpos . 
 moth . an excel devic ! so , if ani of the audienc hiss , you may 
 cri 'well done , hercul ; now thou crushest the snake ! ' that is 
 the way to make an offenc graciou , though few have the grace to 
 do it . 
 armado . for the rest of the worthi ? 
 holofern . i will play three myself . 
 moth . thrice-worthi gentleman ! 
 armado . shall i tell you a thing ? 
 holofern . we attend . 
 armado . we will have , if thi fadg not , an antic . i beseech you , 
 follow . 
 holofern . via , goodman dull ! thou ha spoken no word all thi 
 while . 
 dull . nor understood none neither , sir . 
 holofern . allon ! we will employ thee . 
 dull . i 'll make one in a danc , or so , or i will play 
 on the tabor to the worthi , and let them danc the hay . 
 holofern . most dull , honest dull ! to our sport , away . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the park 
 
 enter the princess , maria , katharin , and rosalin 
 
 princess of franc . sweet heart , we shall be rich ere we depart , 
 if fair come thu plenti in . 
 a ladi wall 'd about with diamond ! 
 look you what i have from the love king . 
 rosalin . madam , came noth els along with that ? 
 princess of franc . noth but thi ! ye , as much love in rhyme 
 as would be cramm 'd up in a sheet of paper 
 writ o ' both side the leaf , margent and all , 
 that he wa fain to seal on cupid 's name . 
 rosalin . that wa the way to make hi godhead wax ; 
 for he hath been five thousand year a boy . 
 katharin . ay , and a shrewd unhappi gallow too . 
 rosalin . you 'll ne'er be friend with him : ' a kill 'd your sister . 
 katharin . he made her melancholi , sad , and heavi ; 
 and so she die . had she been light , like you , 
 of such a merri , nimbl , stir spirit , 
 she might ' a been a grandam ere she die . 
 and so may you ; for a light heart live long . 
 rosalin . what 's your dark mean , mous , of thi light word ? 
 katharin . a light condit in a beauti dark . 
 rosalin . we need more light to find your mean out . 
 katharin . you 'll mar the light by take it in snuff ; 
 therefor i 'll darkli end the argument . 
 rosalin . look what you do , you do it still i ' th ' dark . 
 katharin . so do not you ; for you are a light wench . 
 rosalin . inde , i weigh not you ; and therefor light . 
 katharin . you weigh me not ? o , that 's you care not for me . 
 rosalin . great reason ; for 'past cure is still past care . ' 
 princess of franc . well bandi both ; a set of wit well play 'd . 
 but , rosalin , you have a favour too ? 
 who sent it ? and what is it ? 
 rosalin . i would you knew . 
 an if my face were but as fair as your , 
 my favour were as great : be wit thi . 
 nay , i have vers too , i thank berown ; 
 the number true , and , were the numb'r too , 
 i were the fairest goddess on the ground . 
 i am compar 'd to twenti thousand fair . 
 o , he hath drawn my pictur in hi letter ! 
 princess of franc . anyth like ? 
 rosalin . much in the letter ; noth in the prais . 
 princess of franc . beauteou as ink- a good conclus . 
 katharin . fair as a text b in a copy-book . 
 rosalin . ware pencil , ho ! let me not die your debtor , 
 my red domin , my golden letter : 
 o that your face were not so full of o 's ! 
 katharin . a pox of that jest ! and i beshrew all shrow ! 
 princess of franc . but , katharin , what wa sent to you from fair 
 dumain ? 
 katharin . madam , thi glove . 
 princess of franc . did he not send you twain ? 
 katharin . ye , madam ; and , moreov , 
 some thousand vers of a faith lover ; 
 a huge translat of hypocrisi , 
 vile compil 'd , profound simplic . 
 maria . thi , and these pearl , to me sent longavil ; 
 the letter is too long by half a mile . 
 princess of franc . i think no less . dost thou not wish in heart 
 the chain were longer and the letter short ? 
 maria . ay , or i would these hand might never part . 
 princess of franc . we are wise girl to mock our lover so . 
 rosalin . they are wors fool to purchas mock so . 
 that same berown i 'll tortur ere i go . 
 o that i knew he were but in by th ' week ! 
 how i would make him fawn , and beg , and seek , 
 and wait the season , and observ the time , 
 and spend hi prodig wit in bootless rhyme , 
 and shape hi servic wholli to my hest , 
 and make him proud to make me proud that jest ! 
 so pertaunt-lik would i o'ersway hi state 
 that he should be my fool , and i hi fate . 
 princess of franc . none are so sure caught , when they are 
 catch 'd , 
 as wit turn 'd fool ; folli , in wisdom hatch 'd , 
 hath wisdom 's warrant and the help of school , 
 and wit 's own grace to grace a learn fool . 
 rosalin . the blood of youth burn not with such excess 
 as graviti 's revolt to wanton . 
 maria . folli in fool bear not so strong a note 
 as fool'ri in the wise when wit doth dote , 
 sinc all the power thereof it doth appli 
 to prove , by wit , worth in simplic . 
 
 enter boyet 
 
 princess of franc . here come boyet , and mirth is in hi face . 
 boyet . o , i am stabb 'd with laughter ! where 's her grace ? 
 princess of franc . thi news , boyet ? 
 boyet . prepar , madam , prepar ! 
 arm , wench , arm ! encount mount are 
 against your peac . love doth approach disgui 'd , 
 arm in argument ; you 'll be surpri 'd . 
 muster your wit ; stand in your own defenc ; 
 or hide your head like coward , and fli henc . 
 princess of franc . saint denni to saint cupid ! what are they 
 that charg their breath against us ? say , scout , say . 
 boyet . under the cool shade of a sycamor 
 i thought to close mine eye some half an hour ; 
 when , lo , to interrupt my purpo 'd rest , 
 toward that shade i might behold addrest 
 the king and hi companion ; warili 
 i stole into a neighbour thicket by , 
 and overheard what you shall overhear- 
 that , by and by , disgui 'd they will be here . 
 their herald is a pretti knavish page , 
 that well by heart hath conn 'd hi embassag . 
 action and accent did they teach him there : 
 'thu must thou speak ' and 'thu thi bodi bear , ' 
 and ever and anon they made a doubt 
 presenc majest would put him out ; 
 'for ' quoth the king 'an angel shalt thou see ; 
 yet fear not thou , but speak audaci . ' 
 the boy repli 'an angel is not evil ; 
 i should have fear 'd her had she been a devil . ' 
 with that all laugh 'd , and clapp 'd him on the shoulder , 
 make the bold wag by their prais bolder . 
 one rubb 'd hi elbow , thu , and fleer 'd , and swore 
 a better speech wa never spoke befor . 
 anoth with hi finger and hi thumb 
 cri 'via ! we will do't , come what will come . ' 
 the third he caper 'd , and cri 'all goe well . ' 
 the fourth turn 'd on the toe , and down he fell . 
 with that they all did tumbl on the ground , 
 with such a zealou laughter , so profound , 
 that in thi spleen ridicul appear , 
 to check their folli , passion 's solemn tear . 
 princess of franc . but what , but what , come they to visit us ? 
 boyet . they do , they do , and are apparel 'd thu , 
 like muscovit or russian , as i guess . 
 their purpos is to parley , court , and danc ; 
 and everi one hi love-feat will advanc 
 unto hi sever mistress ; which they 'll know 
 by favour sever which they did bestow . 
 princess of franc . and will they so ? the gallant shall be task 'd , 
 for , ladi , we will everi one be mask 'd ; 
 and not a man of them shall have the grace , 
 despit of suit , to see a ladi 's face . 
 hold , rosalin , thi favour thou shalt wear , 
 and then the king will court thee for hi dear ; 
 hold , take thou thi , my sweet , and give me thine , 
 so shall berown take me for rosalin . 
 and chang you favour too ; so shall your love 
 woo contrari , deceiv 'd by these remov . 
 rosalin . come on , then , wear the favour most in sight . 
 katharin . but , in thi chang , what is your intent ? 
 princess of franc . the effect of my intent is to cross their . 
 they do it but in mock merriment , 
 and mock for mock is onli my intent . 
 their sever counsel they unbosom shall 
 to love mistook , and so be mock 'd withal 
 upon the next occas that we meet 
 with visag display 'd to talk and greet . 
 rosalin . but shall we danc , if they desir us to't ? 
 princess of franc . no , to the death , we will not move a foot , 
 nor to their penn 'd speech render we no grace ; 
 but while 't is spoke each turn away her face . 
 boyet . whi , that contempt will kill the speaker 's heart , 
 and quit divorc hi memori from hi part . 
 princess of franc . therefor i do it ; and i make no doubt 
 the rest will ne'er come in , if he be out . 
 there 's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown , 
 to make their our , and our none but our own ; 
 so shall we stay , mock intend game , 
 and they well mock 'd depart away with shame . 
 [ trumpet sound within ] 
 boyet . the trumpet sound ; be mask 'd ; the masker come . 
 [ the ladi mask ] 
 
 enter blackamoor music , moth as prologu , the 
 king and hi lord as masker , in the guis of russian 
 
 moth . all hail , the richest heauti on the earth ! 
 boyet . beauti no richer than rich taffeta . 
 moth . a holi parcel of the fairest dame 
 [ the ladi turn their back to him ] 
 that ever turn 'd their- backs- to mortal view ! 
 berown . their eye , villain , their eye . 
 moth . that ever turn 'd their eye to mortal view ! 
 out- 
 boyet . true ; out inde . 
 moth . out of your favour , heavenli spirit , vouchsaf 
 not to behold- 
 berown . onc to behold , rogu . 
 moth . onc to behold with your sun-beam eyes- with your 
 sun-beam eyes- 
 boyet . they will not answer to that epithet ; 
 you were best call it 'daughter-beam eye . ' 
 moth . they do not mark me , and that bring me out . 
 berown . is thi your perfect ? be gone , you rogu . 
 exit moth 
 rosalin . what would these stranger ? know their mind , boyet . 
 if they do speak our languag , 't is our will 
 that some plain man recount their purpos . 
 know what they would . 
 boyet . what would you with the princess ? 
 berown . noth but peac and gentl visit . 
 rosalin . what would they , say they ? 
 boyet . noth but peac and gentl visit . 
 rosalin . whi , that they have ; and bid them so be gone . 
 boyet . she say you have it , and you may be gone . 
 king . say to her we have measur 'd mani mile 
 to tread a measur with her on thi grass . 
 boyet . they say that they have measur 'd mani a mile 
 to tread a measur with you on thi grass . 
 rosalin . it is not so . ask them how mani inch 
 is in one mile ? if they have measur mani , 
 the measur , then , of one is eas'li told . 
 boyet . if to come hither you have measur 'd mile , 
 and mani mile , the princess bid you tell 
 how mani inch doth fill up one mile . 
 berown . tell her we measur them by weari step . 
 boyet . she hear herself . 
 rosalin . how mani weari step 
 of mani weari mile you have o'ergon 
 are numb'r in the travel of one mile ? 
 berown . we number noth that we spend for you ; 
 our duti is so rich , so infinit , 
 that we may do it still without accompt . 
 vouchsaf to show the sunshin of your face , 
 that we , like savag , may worship it . 
 rosalin . my face is but a moon , and cloud too . 
 king . bless are cloud , to do as such cloud do . 
 vouchsaf , bright moon , and these thi star , to shine , 
 those cloud remov , upon our wateri eyn . 
 rosalin . o vain petition ! beg a greater matter ; 
 thou now request but moonshin in the water . 
 king . then in our measur do but vouchsaf one chang . 
 thou bid'st me beg ; thi beg is not strang . 
 rosalin . play , music , then . nay , you must do it soon . 
 not yet ? no danc ! thu chang i like the moon . 
 king . will you not danc ? how come you thu estrang ? 
 rosalin . you took the moon at full ; but now she 's chang . 
 king . yet still she is the moon , and i the man . 
 the music play ; vouchsaf some motion to it . 
 rosalin . our ear vouchsaf it . 
 king . but your leg should do it . 
 rosalin . sinc you are stranger , and come here by chanc , 
 we 'll not be nice ; take hand . we will not danc . 
 king . whi take we hand then ? 
 rosalin . onli to part friend . 
 curtsi , sweet heart ; and so the measur end . 
 king . more measur of thi measur ; be not nice . 
 rosalin . we can afford no more at such a price . 
 king . price you yourselv . what buy your compani ? 
 rosalin . your absenc onli . 
 king . that can never be . 
 rosalin . then can not we be bought ; and so adieu- 
 twice to your visor and half onc to you . 
 king . if you deni to danc , let 's hold more chat . 
 rosalin . in privat then . 
 king . i am best plea 'd with that . [ they convers apart ] 
 berown . white-hand mistress , one sweet word with thee . 
 princess of franc . honey , and milk , and sugar ; there is three . 
 berown . nay , then , two trey , an if you grow so nice , 
 metheglin , wort , and malmsey ; well run dice ! 
 there 's half a dozen sweet . 
 princess of franc . seventh sweet , adieu ! 
 sinc you can cog , i 'll play no more with you . 
 berown . one word in secret . 
 princess of franc . let it not be sweet . 
 berown . thou grievest my gall . 
 princess of franc . gall ! bitter . 
 berown . therefor meet . [ they convers apart ] 
 dumain . will you vouchsaf with me to chang a word ? 
 maria . name it . 
 dumain . fair lady- 
 maria . say you so ? fair lord- 
 take that for your fair ladi . 
 dumain . pleas it you , 
 as much in privat , and i 'll bid adieu . 
 [ they convers apart ] 
 katharin . what , wa your vizard made without a tongu ? 
 longavil . i know the reason , ladi , whi you ask . 
 katharin . o for your reason ! quickli , sir ; i long . 
 longavil . you have a doubl tongu within your mask , 
 and would afford my speechless vizard half . 
 katharin . 'veal ' quoth the dutchman . is not 'veal ' a calf ? 
 longavil . a calf , fair ladi ! 
 katharin . no , a fair lord calf . 
 longavil . let 's part the word . 
 katharin . no , i 'll not be your half . 
 take all and wean it ; it may prove an ox . 
 longavil . look how you butt yourself in these sharp mock ! 
 will you give horn , chast ladi ? do not so . 
 katharin . then die a calf , befor your horn do grow . 
 longavil . one word in privat with you ere i die . 
 katharin . bleat softli , then ; the butcher hear you cri . 
 [ they convers apart ] 
 boyet . the tongu of mock wench are as keen 
 as is the razor 's edg invis , 
 cut a smaller hair than may be seen , 
 abov the sens of sens ; so sensibl 
 seemeth their confer ; their conceit have wing , 
 fleeter than arrow , bullet , wind , thought , swifter thing . 
 rosalin . not one word more , my maid ; break off , break off . 
 berown . by heaven , all dry-beaten with pure scoff ! 
 king . farewel , mad wench ; you have simpl wit . 
 exeunt king , lord , and blackamoor 
 princess of franc . twenti adieu , my frozen muscovit . 
 are these the breed of wit so wonder at ? 
 boyet . taper they are , with your sweet breath puff 'd out . 
 rosalin . well-lik wit they have ; gross , gross ; fat , fat . 
 princess of franc . o poverti in wit , kingly-poor flout ! 
 will they not , think you , hang themselv to-night ? 
 or ever but in vizard show their face ? 
 thi pert berown wa out of count'nanc quit . 
 rosalin . they were all in lament case ! 
 the king wa weeping-rip for a good word . 
 princess of franc . berown did swear himself out of all suit . 
 maria . dumain wa at my servic , and hi sword . 
 'no point ' quoth i ; my servant straight wa mute . 
 katharin . lord longavil said i came o'er hi heart ; 
 and trow you what he call 'd me ? 
 princess of franc . qualm , perhap . 
 katharin . ye , in good faith . 
 princess of franc . go , sick as thou art ! 
 rosalin . well , better wit have worn plain statute-cap . 
 but will you hear ? the king is my love sworn . 
 princess of franc . and quick berown hath plight faith to me . 
 katharin . and longavil wa for my servic born . 
 maria . dumain is mine , as sure as bark on tree . 
 boyet . madam , and pretti mistress , give ear : 
 immedi they will again be here 
 in their own shape ; for it can never be 
 they will digest thi harsh indign . 
 princess of franc . will they return ? 
 boyet . they will , they will , god know , 
 and leap for joy , though they are lame with blow ; 
 therefor , chang favour ; and , when they repair , 
 blow like sweet rose in thi summer air . 
 princess of franc . how blow ? how blow ? speak to be understood . 
 boyet . fair ladi mask 'd are rose in their bud : 
 dismask 'd , their damask sweet commixtur shown , 
 are angel vail cloud , or rose blown . 
 princess of franc . avaunt , perplex ! what shall we do 
 if they return in their own shape to woo ? 
 rosalin . good madam , if by me you 'll be advi 'd , 
 let 's mock them still , as well known as disgui 'd . 
 let us complain to them what fool were here , 
 disgui 'd like muscovit , in shapeless gear ; 
 and wonder what they were , and to what end 
 their shallow show and prologu vile penn 'd , 
 and their rough carriag so ridicul , 
 should be present at our tent to us . 
 boyet . ladi , withdraw ; the gallant are at hand . 
 princess of franc . whip to our tent , as roe run o'er land . 
 exeunt princess , rosalin , katharin , and maria 
 
 re-ent the king , berown , longavil , and dumain , 
 in their proper habit 
 
 king . fair sir , god save you ! where 's the princess ? 
 boyet . gone to her tent . pleas it your majesti 
 command me ani servic to her thither ? 
 king . that she vouchsaf me audienc for one word . 
 boyet . i will ; and so will she , i know , my lord . exit 
 berown . thi fellow peck up wit as pigeon peas , 
 and utter it again when god doth pleas . 
 he is wit 's pedlar , and retail hi ware 
 at wake , and wassail , meet , market , fair ; 
 and we that sell by gross , the lord doth know , 
 have not the grace to grace it with such show . 
 thi gallant pin the wench on hi sleev ; 
 had he been adam , he had tempt eve . 
 ' a can carv too , and lisp ; whi thi is he 
 that kiss 'd hi hand away in courtesi ; 
 thi is the ape of form , monsieur the nice , 
 that , when he play at tabl , chide the dice 
 in honour term ; nay , he can sing 
 a mean most meanli ; and in usher , 
 mend him who can . the ladi call him sweet ; 
 the stair , as he tread on them , kiss hi feet . 
 thi is the flow ' r that smile on everi one , 
 to show hi teeth as white as whales-bon ; 
 and conscienc that will not die in debt 
 pay him the due of 'honey-tongu boyet . ' 
 king . a blister on hi sweet tongu , with my heart , 
 that put armado 's page out of hi part ! 
 
 re-ent the princess , usher by boyet ; rosalin , 
 maria , and katharin 
 
 berown . see where it come ! behaviour , what wert thou 
 till thi man show 'd thee ? and what art thou now ? 
 king . all hail , sweet madam , and fair time of day ! 
 princess of franc . 'fair ' in 'all hail ' is foul , as i conceiv . 
 king . constru my speech better , if you may . 
 princess of franc . then wish me better ; i will give you leav . 
 king . we came to visit you , and purpos now 
 to lead you to our court ; vouchsaf it then . 
 princess of franc . thi field shall hold me , and so hold your vow : 
 nor god , nor i , delight in perjur 'd men . 
 king . rebuk me not for that which you provok . 
 the virtu of your eye must break my oath . 
 princess of franc . you nicknam virtu : vice you should have 
 spoke ; 
 for virtu 's offic never break men 's troth . 
 now by my maiden honour , yet as pure 
 as the unsulli lili , i protest , 
 a world of torment though i should endur , 
 i would not yield to be your hous 's guest ; 
 so much i hate a break caus to be 
 of heavenli oath , vow with integr . 
 king . o , you have liv 'd in desol here , 
 unseen , unvisit , much to our shame . 
 princess of franc . not so , my lord ; it is not so , i swear ; 
 we have had pastim here , and pleasant game ; 
 a mess of russian left us but of late . 
 king . how , madam ! russian ! 
 princess of franc . ay , in truth , my lord ; 
 trim gallant , full of courtship and of state . 
 rosalin . madam , speak true . it is not so , my lord . 
 my ladi , to the manner of the day , 
 in courtesi give undeserv prais . 
 we four inde confront were with four 
 in russian habit ; here they stay an hour 
 and talk 'd apac ; and in that hour , my lord , 
 they did not bless us with one happi word . 
 i dare not call them fool ; but thi i think , 
 when they are thirsti , fool would fain have drink . 
 berown . thi jest is dri to me . fair gentl sweet , 
 your wit make wise thing foolish ; when we greet , 
 with eye best see , heaven 's fieri eye , 
 by light we lose light ; your capac 
 is of that natur that to your huge store 
 wise thing seem foolish and rich thing but poor . 
 rosalin . thi prove you wise and rich , for in my eye- 
 berown . i am a fool , and full of poverti . 
 rosalin . but that you take what doth to you belong , 
 it were a fault to snatch word from my tongu . 
 berown . o , i am your , and all that i possess . 
 rosalin . all the fool mine ? 
 berown . i can not give you less . 
 rosalin . which of the vizard wa it that you wore ? 
 berown . where ? when ? what vizard ? whi demand you thi ? 
 rosalin . there , then , that vizard ; that superflu case 
 that hid the wors and show 'd the better face . 
 king . we were descri ; they 'll mock us now downright . 
 dumain . let us confess , and turn it to a jest . 
 princess of franc . amaz 'd , my lord ? whi look your high sad ? 
 rosalin . help , hold hi brow ! he 'll swoon ! whi look you pale ? 
 sea-sick , i think , come from muscovi . 
 berown . thu pour the star down plagu for perjuri . 
 can ani face of brass hold longer out ? 
 here stand i , lady- dart thi skill at me , 
 bruis me with scorn , confound me with a flout , 
 thrust thi sharp wit quit through my ignor , 
 cut me to piec with thi keen conceit ; 
 and i will wish thee never more to danc , 
 nor never more in russian habit wait . 
 o , never will i trust to speech penn 'd , 
 nor to the motion of a school-boy 's tongu , 
 nor never come in vizard to my friend , 
 nor woo in rhyme , like a blind harper 's song . 
 taffeta phrase , silken term precis , 
 three-pil 'd hyperbol , spruce affect , 
 figur pedantical- these summer-fli 
 have blown me full of maggot ostent . 
 i do forswear them ; and i here protest , 
 by thi white glove- how white the hand , god know ! - 
 henceforth my woo mind shall be express 'd 
 in russet yea , and honest kersey noe . 
 and , to begin , wench- so god help me , law ! - 
 my love to thee is sound , san crack or flaw . 
 rosalin . san 'san , ' i pray you . 
 berown . yet i have a trick 
 of the old rage ; bear with me , i am sick ; 
 i 'll leav it by degre . soft , let us see- 
 write 'lord have merci on us ' on those three ; 
 they are infect ; in their heart it lie ; 
 they have the plagu , and caught it of your eye . 
 these lord are visit ; you are not free , 
 for the lord 's token on you do i see . 
 princess of franc . no , they are free that gave these token to us . 
 berown . our state are forfeit ; seek not to undo us . 
 rosalin . it is not so ; for how can thi be true , 
 that you stand forfeit , be those that sue ? 
 berown . peac ; for i will not have to do with you . 
 rosalin . nor shall not , if i do as i intend . 
 berown . speak for yourselv ; my wit is at an end . 
 king . teach us , sweet madam , for our rude transgress 
 some fair excus . 
 princess of franc . the fairest is confess . 
 were not you here but even now , disgui 'd ? 
 king . madam , i wa . 
 princess of franc . and were you well advi 'd ? 
 king . i wa , fair madam . 
 princess of franc . when you then were here , 
 what did you whisper in your ladi 's ear ? 
 king . that more than all the world i did respect her . 
 princess of franc . when she shall challeng thi , you will reject 
 her . 
 king . upon mine honour , no . 
 princess of franc . peac , peac , forbear ; 
 your oath onc broke , you forc not to forswear . 
 king . despis me when i break thi oath of mine . 
 princess of franc . i will ; and therefor keep it . rosalin , 
 what did the russian whisper in your ear ? 
 rosalin . madam , he swore that he did hold me dear 
 as preciou eyesight , and did valu me 
 abov thi world ; ad thereto , moreov , 
 that he would wed me , or els die my lover . 
 princess of franc . god give thee joy of him ! the nobl lord 
 most honour doth uphold hi word . 
 king . what mean you , madam ? by my life , my troth , 
 i never swore thi ladi such an oath . 
 rosalin . by heaven , you did ; and , to confirm it plain , 
 you gave me thi ; but take it , sir , again . 
 king . my faith and thi the princess i did give ; 
 i knew her by thi jewel on her sleev . 
 princess of franc . pardon me , sir , thi jewel did she wear ; 
 and lord berown , i thank him , is my dear . 
 what , will you have me , or your pearl again ? 
 berown . neither of either ; i remit both twain . 
 i see the trick o n't : here wa a consent , 
 know aforehand of our merriment , 
 to dash it like a christma comedi . 
 some carry-tal , some please-man , some slight zani , 
 some mumble-new , some trencher-knight , some dick , 
 that smile hi cheek in year and know the trick 
 to make my ladi laugh when she 's dispo 'd , 
 told our intent befor ; which onc disclo 'd , 
 the ladi did chang favour ; and then we , 
 follow the sign , woo 'd but the sign of she . 
 now , to our perjuri to add more terror , 
 we are again forsworn in will and error . 
 much upon thi it is ; [ to boyet ] and might not you 
 forestal our sport , to make us thu untru ? 
 do not you know my ladi 's foot by th ' squier , 
 and laugh upon the appl of her eye ? 
 and stand between her back , sir , and the fire , 
 hold a trencher , jest merrili ? 
 you put our page out . go , you are allow 'd ; 
 die when you will , a smock shall be your shroud . 
 you leer upon me , do you ? there 's an eye 
 wound like a leaden sword . 
 boyet . full merrili 
 hath thi brave manag , thi career , been run . 
 berown . lo , he is tilt straight ! peac ; i have done . 
 
 enter costard 
 
 welcom , pure wit ! thou part'st a fair fray . 
 costard . o lord , sir , they would know 
 whether the three worthi shall come in or no ? 
 berown . what , are there but three ? 
 costard . no , sir ; but it is vara fine , 
 for everi one pursent three . 
 berown . and three time thrice is nine . 
 costard . not so , sir ; under correct , sir , 
 i hope it is not so . 
 you can not beg us , sir , i can assur you , sir ; we know what we 
 know ; 
 i hope , sir , three time thrice , sir- 
 berown . is not nine . 
 costard . under correct , sir , we know whereuntil it doth amount . 
 berown . by jove , i alway took three three for nine . 
 costard . o lord , sir , it were piti you should get your live by 
 reck'n , sir . 
 berown . how much is it ? 
 costard . o lord , sir , the parti themselv , the actor , sir , will 
 show whereuntil it doth amount . for mine own part , i am , as they 
 say , but to parfect one man in one poor man , pompion the great , 
 sir . 
 berown . art thou one of the worthi ? 
 costard . it pleas them to think me worthi of pompey the great ; 
 for mine own part , i know not the degre of the worthi ; but i am 
 to stand for him . 
 berown . go , bid them prepar . 
 costard . we will turn it fine off , sir ; we will take some care . 
 exit costard 
 king . berown , they will shame us ; let them not approach . 
 berown . we are shame-proof , my lord , and 't is some polici 
 to have one show wors than the king 's and hi compani . 
 king . i say they shall not come . 
 princess of franc . nay , my good lord , let me o'errul you now . 
 that sport best pleas that doth least know how ; 
 where zeal strive to content , and the content 
 die in the zeal of that which it present . 
 their form confound make most form in mirth , 
 when great thing labour perish in their birth . 
 berown . a right descript of our sport , my lord . 
 
 enter armado 
 
 armado . anoint , i implor so much expens of thi royal sweet 
 breath as will utter a brace of word . 
 [ convers apart with the king , and deliv a paper ] 
 princess of franc . doth thi man serv god ? 
 berown . whi ask you ? 
 princess of franc . ' a speak not like a man of god hi make . 
 armado . that is all one , my fair , sweet , honey monarch ; for , i 
 protest , the schoolmast is exceed fantast ; too too vain , 
 too too vain ; but we will put it , as they say , to fortuna de la 
 guerra . i wish you the peac of mind , most royal couplement ! 
 exit armado 
 king . here is like to be a good presenc of worthi . he present 
 hector of troy ; the swain , pompey the great ; the parish curat , 
 alexand ; arinado 's page , hercul ; the pedant , juda 
 maccabaeu . 
 and if these four worthi in their first show thrive , 
 these four will chang habit and present the other five . 
 berown . there is five in the first show . 
 king . you are deceiv , 't is not so . 
 berown . the pedant , the braggart , the hedge-priest , the fool , and 
 the boy : 
 abat throw at novum , and the whole world again 
 can not pick out five such , take each one in hi vein . 
 king . the ship is under sail , and here she come amain . 
 
 enter costard , arm for pompey 
 
 costard . i pompey am- 
 berown . you lie , you are not he . 
 costard . i pompey am- 
 boyet . with libbard 's head on knee . 
 berown . well said , old mocker ; i must need be friend with thee . 
 costard . i pompey am , pompey surnam 'd the big- 
 dumain . the great . 
 costard . it is great , sir . 
 pompey surnam 'd the great , 
 that oft in field , with targ and shield , did make my foe to 
 sweat ; 
 and travel along thi coast , i bere am come by chanc , 
 and lay my arm befor the leg of thi sweet lass of franc . 
 
 if your ladyship would say 'thank , pompey , ' i had done . 
 princess of franc . great thank , great pompey . 
 costard . 't is not so much worth ; but i hope i wa perfect . 
 i made a littl fault in great . 
 berown . my hat to a halfpenni , pompey prove the best worthi . 
 
 enter sir nathaniel , for alexand 
 
 nathaniel . when in the world i liv 'd , i wa the world 's command ; 
 by east , west , north , and south , i spread my conquer might . 
 my scutcheon plain declar that i am alisander- 
 boyet . your nose say , no , you are not ; for it stand to right . 
 berown . your nose smell 'no ' in thi , most tender-smel 
 knight . 
 princess of franc . the conqueror is dismay 'd . proceed , good 
 alexand . 
 nathaniel . when in the world i liv 'd , i wa the world 's commander- 
 boyet . most true , 't is right , you were so , alisand . 
 berown . pompey the great ! 
 costard . your servant , and costard . 
 berown . take away the conqueror , take away alisand . 
 costard . [ to sir nathaniel ] o , sir , you have overthrown alisand 
 the conqueror ! you will be scrap 'd out of the paint cloth for 
 thi . your lion , that hold hi poleax sit on a close-stool , 
 will be given to ajax . he will be the ninth worthi . a conqueror 
 and afeard to speak ! run away for shame , alisand . 
 [ sir nathaniel retir ] there , a n't shall pleas you , a foolish 
 mild man ; an honest man , look you , and soon dash 'd . he is a 
 marvel good neighbour , faith , and a veri good bowler ; but for 
 alisander- ala ! you see how 't is - a littl o'erpart . but there 
 are worthi a-com will speak their mind in some other sort . 
 princess of franc . stand asid , good pompey . 
 
 enter holofern , for juda ; and moth , for hercul 
 
 holofern . great hercul is present by thi imp , 
 whose club kill 'd cerberu , that three-head canu ; 
 and when be wa a babe , a child , a shrimp , 
 thu did he strangl serpent in hi manu . 
 quoniam he seemeth in minor , 
 ergo i come with thi apolog . 
 keep some state in thi exit , and vanish . [ moth retir ] 
 juda i am- 
 dumain . a juda ! 
 holofern . not iscariot , sir . 
 juda i am , yclipe maccabaeu . 
 dumain . juda maccabaeu clipt is plain juda . 
 berown . a kiss traitor . how art thou prov 'd juda ? 
 holofern . juda i am- 
 dumain . the more shame for you , juda ! 
 holofern . what mean you , sir ? 
 boyet . to make juda hang himself . 
 holofern . begin , sir ; you are my elder . 
 berown . well follow : juda wa hang on an elder . 
 holofern . i will not be put out of counten . 
 berown . becaus thou hast no face . 
 holofern . what is thi ? 
 boyet . a cittern-head . 
 dumain . the head of a bodkin . 
 berown . a death 's face in a ring . 
 longavil . the face of an old roman coin , scarc seen . 
 boyet . the pommel of coesar 's falchion . 
 dumain . the carv'd-bon face on a flask . 
 berown . saint georg 's half-cheek in a brooch . 
 dumain . ay , and in a brooch of lead . 
 berown . ay , and worn in the cap of a tooth-draw . and now , 
 forward ; for we have put thee in counten . 
 holofern . you have put me out of counten . 
 berown . fals : we have given thee face . 
 holofern . but you have outfac 'd them all . 
 berown . an thou wert a lion we would do so . 
 boyet . therefor , as he is an ass , let him go . 
 and so adieu , sweet jude ! nay , whi dost thou stay ? 
 dumain . for the latter end of hi name . 
 berown . for the ass to the jude ; give it him- jud-a , away . 
 holofern . thi is not gener , not gentl , not humbl . 
 boyet . a light for monsieur juda ! it grow dark , he may stumbl . 
 [ holofern retir ] 
 princess of franc . ala , poor maccabaeu , how hath he been bait ! 
 
 enter armado , for hector 
 
 berown . hide thi head , achil ; here come hector in arm . 
 dumain . though my mock come home by me , i will now be merri . 
 king . hector wa but a troyan in respect of thi . 
 boyet . but is thi hector ? 
 dumain . i think hector wa not so clean-timb 'd . 
 longavil . hi leg is too big for hector 's . 
 dumain . more calf , certain . 
 boyet . no ; he is best indu in the small . 
 berown . thi can not be hector . 
 dumain . he 's a god or a painter , for he make face . 
 armado . the armipot mar , of lanc the almighti , 
 gave hector a gift- 
 dumain . a gilt nutmeg . 
 berown . a lemon . 
 longavil . stuck with clove . 
 dumain . no , cloven . 
 armado . peac ! 
 the armipot mar , of lanc the almighti , 
 gave hector a gift , the heir of ilion ; 
 a man so breath that certain he would fight ye , 
 from morn till night out of hi pavilion . 
 i am that flower- 
 dumain . that mint . 
 longavil . that columbin . 
 armado . sweet lord longavil , rein thi tongu . 
 longavil . i must rather give it the rein , for it run against 
 hector . 
 dumain . ay , and hector 's a greyhound . 
 armado . the sweet war-man is dead and rotten ; sweet chuck , beat 
 not the bone of the buri ; when he breath , he wa a man . but 
 i will forward with my devic . [ to the princess ] sweet royalti , 
 bestow on me the sens of hear . 
 
 [ berown step forth , and speak to costard ] 
 
 princess of franc . speak , brave hector ; we are much delight . 
 armado . i do ador thi sweet grace 's slipper . 
 boyet . [ asid to dumain ] love her by the foot . 
 dumain . [ asid to boyet ] he may not by the yard . 
 armado . thi hector far surmount hannibal- 
 costard . the parti is gone , fellow hector , she is gone ; she is two 
 month on her way . 
 armado . what meanest thou ? 
 costard . faith , unless you play the honest troyan , the poor wench 
 is cast away . she 's quick ; the child brag in her belli alreadi ; 
 't is your . 
 armado . dost thou infamon me among potent ? thou shalt die . 
 costard . then shall hector be whipt for jaquenetta that is quick by 
 him , and hang 'd for pompey that is dead by him . 
 dumain . most rare pompey ! 
 boyet . renown pompey ! 
 berown . greater than great ! great , great , great pompey ! pompey the 
 huge ! 
 dumain . hector trembl . 
 berown . pompey is move . more ate , more ate ! stir them on ! stir 
 them on ! 
 dumain . hector will challeng him . 
 berown . ay , if ' a have no more man 's blood in hi belli than will 
 sup a flea . 
 armado . by the north pole , i do challeng thee . 
 costard . i will not fight with a pole , like a northern man ; i 'll 
 slash ; i 'll do it by the sword . i bepray you , let me borrow my 
 arm again . 
 dumain . room for the incens worthi ! 
 costard . i 'll do it in my shirt . 
 dumain . most resolut pompey ! 
 moth . master , let me take you a buttonhol lower . do you not see 
 pompey is uncas for the combat ? what mean you ? you will lose 
 your reput . 
 armado . gentlemen and soldier , pardon me ; i will not combat in my 
 shirt . 
 dumain . you may not deni it : pompey hath made the challeng . 
 armado . sweet blood , i both may and will . 
 berown . what reason have you for 't ? 
 armado . the nake truth of it is : i have no shirt ; i go woolward 
 for penanc . 
 boyet . true , and it wa enjoin him in rome for want of linen ; 
 sinc when , i 'll be sworn , he wore none but a dishclout of 
 jaquenetta 's , and that ' a wear next hi heart for a favour . 
 
 enter as messeng , monsieur marcad 
 
 marcad . god save you , madam ! 
 princess of franc . welcom , marcad ; 
 but that thou interruptest our merriment . 
 marcad . i am sorri , madam ; for the news i bring 
 is heavi in my tongu . the king your father- 
 princess of franc . dead , for my life ! 
 marcad . even so ; my tale is told . 
 berown . worthi away ; the scene begin to cloud . 
 armado . for mine own part , i breath free breath . i have seen the 
 day of wrong through the littl hole of discret , and i will 
 right myself like a soldier . exeunt worthi 
 king . how fare your majesti ? 
 princess of franc . boyet , prepar ; i will away to-night . 
 king . madam , not so ; i do beseech you stay . 
 princess of franc . prepar , i say . i thank you , graciou lord , 
 for all your fair endeavour , and entreat , 
 out of a new-sad soul , that you vouchsaf 
 in your rich wisdom to excus or hide 
 the liber opposit of our spirit , 
 if over-boldli we have born ourselv 
 in the convers of breath- your gentl 
 wa guilti of it . farewel , worthi lord . 
 a heavi heart bear not a nimbl tongu . 
 excus me so , come too short of thank 
 for my great suit so easili obtain 'd . 
 king . the extrem part of time extrem form 
 all caus to the purpos of hi speed ; 
 and often at hi veri loos decid 
 that which long process could not arbitr . 
 and though the mourn brow of progeni 
 forbid the smile courtesi of love 
 the holi suit which fain it would convinc , 
 yet , sinc love 's argument wa first on foot , 
 let not the cloud of sorrow justl it 
 from what it purpo 'd ; sinc to wail friend lost 
 is not by much so wholesome-profit 
 as to rejoic at friend but newli found . 
 princess of franc . i understand you not ; my grief are doubl . 
 berown . honest plain word best pierc the ear of grief ; 
 and by these badg understand the king . 
 for your fair sake have we neglect time , 
 play 'd foul play with our oath ; your beauti , ladi , 
 hath much deform us , fashion our humour 
 even to the oppos end of our intent ; 
 and what in us hath seem 'd ridicul , 
 as love is full of unbefit strain , 
 all wanton as a child , skip and vain ; 
 form 'd by the eye and therefor , like the eye , 
 full of strang shape , of habit , and of form , 
 vari in subject as the eye doth roll 
 to everi vari object in hi glanc ; 
 which parti-co presenc of loos love 
 put on by us , if in your heavenli eye 
 have misbecom 'd our oath and graviti , 
 those heavenli eye that look into these fault 
 suggest us to make . therefor , ladi , 
 our love be your , the error that love make 
 is likewis your . we to ourselv prove fals , 
 by be onc fals for ever to be true 
 to those that make us both- fair ladi , you ; 
 and even that falsehood , in itself a sin , 
 thu purifi itself and turn to grace . 
 princess of franc . we have receiv 'd your letter , full of love ; 
 your favour , the ambassador of love ; 
 and , in our maiden council , rate them 
 at courtship , pleasant jest , and courtesi , 
 as bombast and as line to the time ; 
 but more devout than thi in our respect 
 have we not been ; and therefor met your love 
 in their own fashion , like a merriment . 
 dumain . our letter , madam , show 'd much more than jest . 
 longavil . so did our look . 
 rosalin . we did not quot them so . 
 king . now , at the latest minut of the hour , 
 grant us your love . 
 princess of franc . a time , methink , too short 
 to make a world-without-end bargain in . 
 no , no , my lord , your grace is perjur 'd much , 
 full of dear guilti ; and therefor thi , 
 if for my love , as there is no such caus , 
 you will do aught- thi shall you do for me : 
 your oath i will not trust ; but go with speed 
 to some forlorn and nake hermitag , 
 remot from all the pleasur of the world ; 
 there stay until the twelv celesti sign 
 have brought about the annual reckon . 
 if thi auster insoci life 
 chang not your offer made in heat of blood , 
 if frost and fast , hard lodg and thin weed , 
 nip not the gaudi blossom of your love , 
 but that it bear thi trial , and last love , 
 then , at the expir of the year , 
 come , challeng me , challeng me by these desert ; 
 and , by thi virgin palm now kiss thine , 
 i will be thine ; and , till that instant , shut 
 my woeful self up in a mourn hous , 
 rain the tear of lament 
 for the remembr of my father 's death . 
 if thi thou do deni , let our hand part , 
 neither intitl in the other 's heart . 
 king . if thi , or more than thi , i would deni , 
 to flatter up these power of mine with rest , 
 the sudden hand of death close up mine eye ! 
 henc hermit then , my heart is in thi breast . 
 berown . and what to me , my love ? and what to me ? 
 rosalin . you must he purg too , your sin are rack 'd ; 
 you are attaint with fault and perjuri ; 
 therefor , if you my favour mean to get , 
 a twelvemonth shall you spend , and never rest , 
 but seek the weari bed of peopl sick . 
 dumain . but what to me , my love ? but what to me ? 
 a wife ? 
 katharin . a beard , fair health , and honesti ; 
 with threefold love i wish you all these three . 
 dumain . o , shall i say i thank you , gentl wife ? 
 katharin . no so , my lord ; a twelvemonth and a day 
 i 'll mark no word that smooth-fac 'd wooer say . 
 come when the king doth to my ladi come ; 
 then , if i have much love , i 'll give you some . 
 dumain . i 'll serv thee true and faith till then . 
 katharin . yet swear not , lest ye be forsworn again . 
 longavil . what say maria ? 
 maria . at the twelvemonth 's end 
 i 'll chang my black gown for a faith friend . 
 longavil . i 'll stay with patienc ; but the time is long . 
 maria . the liker you ; few taller are so young . 
 berown . studi my ladi ? mistress , look on me ; 
 behold the window of my heart , mine eye , 
 what humbl suit attend thi answer there . 
 impos some servic on me for thi love . 
 rosalin . oft have i heard of you , my lord berown , 
 befor i saw you ; and the world 's larg tongu 
 proclaim you for a man replet with mock , 
 full of comparison and wound flout , 
 which you on all estat will execut 
 that lie within the merci of your wit . 
 to weed thi wormwood from your fruit brain , 
 and therewith to win me , if you pleas , 
 without the which i am not to be won , 
 you shall thi twelvemonth term from day to day 
 visit the speechless sick , and still convers 
 with groan wretch ; and your task shall be , 
 with all the fierc endeavour of your wit , 
 to enforc the pain impot to smile . 
 berown . to move wild laughter in the throat of death ? 
 it can not be ; it is imposs ; 
 mirth can not move a soul in agoni . 
 rosalin . whi , that 's the way to choke a gibe spirit , 
 whose influenc is begot of that loos grace 
 which shallow laugh hearer give to fool . 
 a jest 's prosper lie in the ear 
 of him that hear it , never in the tongu 
 of him that make it ; then , if sickli ear , 
 deaf 'd with the clamour of their own dear groan , 
 will hear your idl scorn , continu then , 
 and i will have you and that fault withal . 
 but if they will not , throw away that spirit , 
 and i shall find you empti of that fault , 
 right joy of your reform . 
 berown . a twelvemonth ? well , befal what will befal , 
 i 'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospit . 
 princess of franc . [ to the king ] ay , sweet my lord , and so i take 
 my leav . 
 king . no , madam ; we will bring you on your way . 
 berown . our woo doth not end like an old play : 
 jack hath not jill . these ladi ' courtesi 
 might well have made our sport a comedi . 
 king . come , sir , it want a twelvemonth an ' a day , 
 and then 'twill end . 
 berown . that 's too long for a play . 
 
 re-ent armado 
 
 armado . sweet majesti , vouchsaf me- 
 princess of franc . wa not that not hector ? 
 dumain . the worthi knight of troy . 
 armado . i will kiss thi royal finger , and take leav . i am a 
 votari : i have vow 'd to jaquenetta to hold the plough for her 
 sweet love three year . but , most esteem great , will you 
 hear the dialogu that the two learn men have compil in 
 prais of the owl and the cuckoo ? it should have follow in the 
 end of our show . 
 king . call them forth quickli ; we will do so . 
 armado . holla ! approach . 
 
 enter all 
 
 thi side is hiem , winter ; thi ver , the spring- the one 
 maintain by the owl , th ' other by the cuckoo . ver , begin . 
 
 spring 
 when daisi pie and violet blue 
 and lady-smock all silver-whit 
 and cuckoo-bud of yellow hue 
 do paint the meadow with delight , 
 the cuckoo then on everi tree 
 mock marri men , for thu sing he : 
 'cuckoo ; 
 cuckoo , cuckoo'- o word of fear , 
 unpleas to a marri ear ! 
 
 when shepherd pipe on oaten straw , 
 and merri lark are ploughmen 's clock ; 
 when turtl tread , and rook and daw , 
 and maiden bleach their summer smock ; 
 the cuckoo then on everi tree 
 mock marri men , for thu sing he : 
 'cuckoo ; 
 cuckoo , cuckoo'- o word of fear , 
 unpleas to a marri ear ! 
 
 
 winter 
 
 when icicl hang by the wall , 
 and dick the shepherd blow hi nail , 
 and tom bear log into the hall , 
 and milk come frozen home in pail , 
 when blood is nipp 'd , and way be foul , 
 then nightli sing the stare owl : 
 'tu-who ; 
 tu-whit , tu-who'- a merri note , 
 while greasi joan doth keel the pot . 
 
 when all aloud the wind doth blow , 
 and cough drown the parson 's saw , 
 and bird sit brood in the snow , 
 and marian 's nose look red and raw , 
 when roast crab hiss in the bowl , 
 then nightli sing the stare owl : 
 'tu-who ; 
 tu-whit , to-who'- a merri note , 
 while greasi joan doth keel the pot . 
 
 armado . the word of mercuri are harsh after the song of apollo . 
 you that way : we thi way . exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the tragedi of macbeth 
 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 duncan , king of scotland 
 macbeth , thane of glami and cawdor , a gener in the king 's armi 
 ladi macbeth , hi wife 
 macduff , thane of fife , a nobleman of scotland 
 ladi macduff , hi wife 
 malcolm , elder son of duncan 
 donalbain , younger son of duncan 
 banquo , thane of lochab , a gener in the king 's armi 
 fleanc , hi son 
 lennox , nobleman of scotland 
 ross , nobleman of scotland 
 menteith nobleman of scotland 
 angu , nobleman of scotland 
 caith , nobleman of scotland 
 siward , earl of northumberland , gener of the english forc 
 young siward , hi son 
 seyton , attend to macbeth 
 hecat , queen of the witch 
 the three witch 
 boy , son of macduff 
 gentlewoman attend on ladi macbeth 
 an english doctor 
 a scottish doctor 
 a sergeant 
 a porter 
 an old man 
 the ghost of banquo and other apparit 
 lord , gentlemen , offic , soldier , murther , attend , 
 and messeng 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : scotland and england 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 a desert place . thunder and lightn . 
 
 enter three witch . 
 
 first witch . when shall we three meet again ? 
 in thunder , lightn , or in rain ? 
 second witch . when the hurlyburli 's done , 
 when the battl 's lost and won . 
 third witch . that will be ere the set of sun . 
 first witch . where the place ? 
 second witch . upon the heath . 
 third witch . there to meet with macbeth . 
 first witch . i come , graymalkin . 
 all . paddock call . anon ! 
 fair is foul , and foul is fair . 
 hover through the fog and filthi air . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a camp near forr . alarum within . 
 
 enter duncan , malcolm , donalbain , lennox , with attend , 
 meet a bleed sergeant . 
 
 duncan . what bloodi man is that ? he can report , 
 as seemeth by hi plight , of the revolt 
 the newest state . 
 malcolm . thi is the sergeant 
 who like a good and hardi soldier fought 
 'gainst my captiv . hail , brave friend ! 
 say to the king the knowledg of the broil 
 as thou didst leav it . 
 sergeant . doubt it stood , 
 as two spent swimmer that do cling togeth 
 and choke their art . the merciless macdonwald- 
 worthi to be a rebel , for to that 
 the multipli villaini of natur 
 do swarm upon him -from the western isl 
 of kern and gallowglass is suppli ; 
 and fortun , on hi damn quarrel smile , 
 show 'd like a rebel 's whore . but all 's too weak ; 
 for brave macbeth -well he deserv that name- 
 disdain fortun , with hi brandish 'd steel , 
 which smoke with bloodi execut , 
 like valor 's minion carv out hi passag 
 till he face the slave , 
 which ne'er shook hand , nor bade farewel to him , 
 till he unseam 'd him from the nave to the chap , 
 and fix 'd hi head upon our battlement . 
 duncan . o valiant cousin ! worthi gentleman ! 
 sergeant . as whenc the sun 'gin hi reflect 
 shipwreck storm and dire thunder break , 
 so from that spring whenc comfort seem 'd to come 
 discomfort swell . mark , king of scotland , mark . 
 no sooner justic had , with valor arm 'd , 
 compel 'd these skip kern to trust their heel , 
 but the norweyan lord , survey vantag , 
 with furbish 'd arm and new suppli of men , 
 began a fresh assault . 
 duncan . dismay 'd not thi 
 our captain , macbeth and banquo. ? 
 sergeant . ye , 
 as sparrow eagl , or the hare the lion . 
 if i say sooth , i must report they were 
 as cannon overcharg with doubl crack , 
 so they 
 doubli redoubl stroke upon the foe . 
 except they meant to bath in reek wound , 
 or memor anoth golgotha , 
 i can not tell- 
 but i am faint ; my gash cri for help . 
 duncan . so well thi word becom thee as thi wound ; 
 they smack of honor both . go get him surgeon . 
 exit sergeant , attend . 
 who come here ? 
 
 enter ross . 
 
 malcolm the worthi thane of ross . 
 lennox . what a hast look through hi eye ! so should he look 
 that seem to speak thing strang . 
 ross . god save the king ! 
 duncan . whenc camest thou , worthi thane ? 
 ross . from fife , great king , 
 where the norweyan banner flout the sky 
 and fan our peopl cold . 
 norway himself , with terribl number , 
 assist by that most disloy traitor 
 the thane of cawdor , began a dismal conflict , 
 till that bellona 's bridegroom , lapp 'd in proof , 
 confront him with self-comparison , 
 point against point rebelli , arm 'gainst arm , 
 curb hi lavish spirit ; and , to conclud , 
 the victori fell on us . 
 duncan . great happi ! 
 ross . that now 
 sweno , the norway ' king , crave composit ; 
 nor would we deign him burial of hi men 
 till he disburs , at saint colm 's inch , 
 ten thousand dollar to our gener use . 
 duncan . no more that thane of cawdor shall deceiv 
 our bosom interest . go pronounc hi present death , 
 and with hi former titl greet macbeth . 
 ross . i 'll see it done . 
 duncan . what he hath lost , nobl macbeth hath won . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a heath . thunder . 
 
 enter the three witch . 
 
 first witch . where hast thou been , sister ? 
 second witch . kill swine . 
 third witch . sister , where thou ? 
 first witch . a sailor 's wife had chestnut in her lap , 
 and mounch 'd , and mounch 'd , and mounch 'd . `` give me , '' quoth i . 
 `` aroint thee , witch ! '' the rump-f ronyon cri . 
 her husband 's to aleppo gone , master the tiger ; 
 but in a siev i 'll thither sail , 
 and , like a rat without a tail , 
 i 'll do , i 'll do , and i 'll do . 
 second witch . i 'll give thee a wind . 
 first witch . thou'rt kind . 
 third witch . and i anoth . 
 first witch . i myself have all the other , 
 and the veri port they blow , 
 all the quarter that they know 
 i ' the shipman 's card . 
 i will drain him dri as hay : 
 sleep shall neither night nor day 
 hang upon hi penthous lid ; 
 he shall live a man forbid . 
 weari se'nnight nine time nine 
 shall he dwindl , peak , and pine ; 
 though hi bark can not be lost , 
 yet it shall be tempest-toss 'd . 
 look what i have . 
 second witch . show me , show me . 
 first witch . here i have a pilot 's thumb , 
 wreck 'd as homeward he did come . drum within . 
 third witch . a drum , a drum ! 
 macbeth doth come . 
 all . the weird sister , hand in hand , 
 poster of the sea and land , 
 thu do go about , about , 
 thrice to thine , and thrice to mine , 
 and thrice again , to make up nine . 
 peac ! the charm 's wound up . 
 
 enter macbeth and banquo . 
 
 macbeth . so foul and fair a day i have not seen . 
 banquo . how far is't call 'd to forr ? what are these 
 so wither 'd and so wild in their attir , 
 that look not like the inhabit o ' the earth , 
 and yet are o n't ? live you ? or are you aught 
 that man may question ? you seem to understand me , 
 by each at onc her choppi finger lay 
 upon her skinni lip . you should be women , 
 and yet your beard forbid me to interpret 
 that you are so . 
 macbeth . speak , if you can . what are you ? 
 first witch . all hail , macbeth , hail to thee , thane of glami ! 
 second witch . all hail , macbeth , hail to thee , thane of cawdor ! 
 third witch . all hail , macbeth , that shalt be king hereaft ! 
 banquo . good sir , whi do you start , and seem to fear 
 thing that do sound so fair ? i ' the name of truth , 
 are ye fantast or that inde 
 which outwardli ye show ? my nobl partner 
 you greet with present grace and great predict 
 of nobl have and of royal hope , 
 that he seem rapt withal . to me you speak not . 
 if you can look into the seed of time , 
 and say which grain will grow and which will not , 
 speak then to me , who neither beg nor fear 
 your favor nor your hate . 
 first witch . hail ! 
 second witch . hail ! 
 third witch . hail ! 
 first witch . lesser than macbeth , and greater . 
 second witch . not so happi , yet much happier . 
 third witch . thou shalt get king , though thou be none . 
 so all hail , macbeth and banquo ! 
 first witch . banquo and macbeth , all hail ! 
 macbeth . stay , you imperfect speaker , tell me more . 
 by sinel 's death i know i am thane of glami ; 
 but how of cawdor ? the thane of cawdor live , 
 a prosper gentleman ; and to be king 
 stand not within the prospect of belief , 
 no more than to be cawdor . say from whenc 
 you owe thi strang intellig , or whi 
 upon thi blast heath you stop our way 
 with such prophet greet ? speak , i charg you . 
 witch vanish . 
 banquo . the earth hath bubbl as the water ha , 
 and these are of them . whither are they vanish 'd ? 
 macbeth . into the air , and what seem 'd corpor melt 
 as breath into the wind . would they had stay 'd ! 
 banquo . were such thing here as we do speak about ? 
 or have we eaten on the insan root 
 that take the reason prison ? 
 macbeth . your children shall be king . 
 banquo . you shall be king . 
 macbeth . and thane of cawdor too . went it not so ? 
 banquo . to the selfsam tune and word . who 's here ? 
 
 enter ross and angu . 
 
 ross . the king hath happili receiv , macbeth , 
 the news of thi success ; and when he read 
 thi person ventur in the rebel ' fight , 
 hi wonder and hi prais do contend 
 which should be thine or hi . silenc with that , 
 in view o'er the rest o ' the selfsam day , 
 he find thee in the stout norweyan rank , 
 noth afeard of what thyself didst make , 
 strang imag of death . as thick as hail 
 came post with post , and everi one did bear 
 thi prais in hi kingdom 's great defens , 
 and pour 'd them down befor him . 
 angu . we are sent 
 to give thee , from our royal master , thank ; 
 onli to herald thee into hi sight , 
 not pay thee . 
 ross . and for an earnest of a greater honor , 
 he bade me , from him , call thee thane of cawdor . 
 in which addit , hail , most worthi thane , 
 for it is thine . 
 banquo . what , can the devil speak true ? 
 macbeth . the thane of cawdor live . whi do you dress me 
 in borrow 'd robe ? 
 angu . who wa the thane live yet , 
 but under heavi judgement bear that life 
 which he deserv to lose . whether he wa combin 
 with those of norway , or did line the rebel 
 with hidden help and vantag , or that with both 
 he labor 'd in hi countri 's wreck , i know not ; 
 but treason capit , confess 'd and prove , 
 have overthrown him . 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] glami , and thane of cawdor ! 
 the greatest is behind . [ to ross and angu ] thank for your 
 pain . 
 [ asid to banquo ] do you not hope your children shall be king , 
 when those that gave the thane of cawdor to me 
 promis no less to them ? 
 banquo . [ asid to macbeth . ] that , trust home , 
 might yet enkindl you unto the crown , 
 besid the thane of cawdor . but 't is strang ; 
 and oftentim , to win us to our harm , 
 the instrument of dark tell us truth , 
 win us with honest trifl , to betray 's 
 in deepest consequence- 
 cousin , a word , i pray you . 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] two truth are told , 
 as happi prologu to the swell act 
 of the imperi theme-i thank you , gentlemen . 
 [ asid . ] thi supernatur solicit 
 can not be ill , can not be good . if ill , 
 whi hath it given me earnest of success , 
 commenc in a truth ? i am thane of cawdor . 
 if good , whi do i yield to that suggest 
 whose horrid imag doth unfix my hair 
 and make my seat heart knock at my rib , 
 against the use of natur ? present fear 
 are less than horribl imagin : 
 my thought , whose murther yet is but fantast , 
 shake so my singl state of man that function 
 is smother 'd in surmis , and noth is 
 but what is not . 
 banquo . look , how our partner 's rapt . 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] if chanc will have me king , whi , chanc may 
 crown me 
 without my stir . 
 banquo . new honor come upon him , 
 like our strang garment , cleav not to their mould 
 but with the aid of use . 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] come what come may , 
 time and the hour run through the roughest day . 
 banquo . worthi macbeth , we stay upon your leisur . 
 macbeth . give me your favor ; my dull brain wa wrought 
 with thing forgotten . kind gentlemen , your pain 
 are regist 'd where everi day i turn 
 the leaf to read them . let us toward the king . 
 think upon what hath chanc , and at more time , 
 the interim have weigh 'd it , let us speak 
 our free heart each to other . 
 banquo . veri gladli . 
 macbeth . till then , enough . come , friend . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 forr . the palac . 
 
 flourish . enter duncan , malcolm , donalbain , lennox , and attend . 
 
 duncan . is execut done on cawdor ? are not 
 those in commiss yet return 'd ? 
 malcolm . my lieg , 
 they are not yet come back . but i have spoke 
 with one that saw him die , who did report 
 that veri frankli he confess 'd hi treason , 
 implor your high ' pardon , and set forth 
 a deep repent . noth in hi life 
 becam him like the leav it ; he die 
 as one that had been studi in hi death , 
 to throw away the dearest thing he owe 
 as 'twere a careless trifl . 
 duncan . there 's no art 
 to find the mind 's construct in the face : 
 he wa a gentleman on whom i built 
 an absolut trust . 
 
 enter macbeth , banquo , ross , and angu . 
 
 o worthiest cousin ! 
 the sin of my ingratitud even now 
 wa heavi on me . thou art so far befor , 
 that swiftest wing of recompens is slow 
 to overtak thee . would thou hadst less deserv , 
 that the proport both of thank and payment 
 might have been mine ! onli i have left to say , 
 more is thi due than more than all can pay . 
 macbeth . the servic and the loyalti low , 
 in do it , pay itself . your high ' part 
 is to receiv our duti , and our duti 
 are to your throne and state , children and servant , 
 which do but what they should , by do everyth 
 safe toward your love and honor . 
 duncan . welcom hither . 
 i have begun to plant thee , and will labor 
 to make thee full of grow . nobl banquo , 
 that hast no less deserv , nor must be known 
 no less to have done so ; let me infold thee 
 and hold thee to my heart . 
 banquo . there if i grow , 
 the harvest is your own . 
 duncan . my plenteou joy , 
 wanton in full , seek to hide themselv 
 in drop of sorrow . son , kinsmen , thane , 
 and you whose place are the nearest , know 
 we will establish our estat upon 
 our eldest , malcolm , whom we name hereaft 
 the princ of cumberland ; which honor must 
 not unaccompani invest him onli , 
 but sign of nobl , like star , shall shine 
 on all deserv . from henc to inver , 
 and bind us further to you . 
 macbeth . the rest is labor , which is not use for you . 
 i 'll be myself the harbing , and make joy 
 the hear of my wife with your approach ; 
 so humbl take my leav . 
 duncan . my worthi cawdor ! 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] the princ of cumberland ! that is a step 
 on which i must fall down , or els o'erleap , 
 for in my way it lie . star , hide your fire ; 
 let not light see my black and deep desir . 
 the eye wink at the hand ; yet let that be 
 which the eye fear , when it is done , to see . exit . 
 duncan . true , worthi banquo ! he is full so valiant , 
 and in hi commend i am fed ; 
 it is a banquet to me . let 's after him , 
 whose care is gone befor to bid us welcom . 
 it is a peerless kinsman . flourish . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 inver . macbeth 's castl . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth , read a letter . 
 
 ladi macbeth . `` they met me in the day of success , and i have 
 learn by the perfectest report they have more in them than 
 mortal knowledg . when i burn in desir to question them 
 further , they made themselv air , into which they vanish . 
 while i stood rapt in the wonder of it , came missiv from the 
 king , who all-hail me 'thane of cawdor ' ; by which titl , 
 befor , these weird sister salut me and refer me to the 
 come on of time with 'hail , king that shalt be ! ' thi have i 
 thought good to deliv thee , my dearest partner of great , 
 that thou mightst not lose the due of rejoic , by be 
 ignor of what great is promis thee . lay it to thi heart , 
 and farewel . '' 
 
 glami thou art , and cawdor , and shalt be 
 what thou art promis . yet do i fear thi natur . 
 it is too full o ' the milk of human kind 
 to catch the nearest way . thou wouldst be great ; 
 art not without ambit , but without 
 the ill should attend it . what thou wouldst highli , 
 that wouldst thou holili ; wouldst not play fals , 
 and yet wouldst wrongli win . thou'ldst have , great glami , 
 that which cri , `` thu thou must do , if thou have it ; 
 and that which rather thou dost fear to do 
 than wishest should be undon . '' hie thee hither , 
 that i may pour my spirit in thine ear , 
 and chastis with the valor of my tongu 
 all that imped thee from the golden round , 
 which fate and metaphys aid doth seem 
 to have thee crown 'd withal . 
 
 enter a messeng . 
 
 what is your tide ? 
 messeng . the king come here tonight . 
 ladi macbeth . thou'rt mad to say it ! 
 is not thi master with him ? who , were't so , 
 would have inform 'd for prepar . 
 messeng . so pleas you , it is true ; our thane is come . 
 one of my fellow had the speed of him , 
 who , almost dead for breath , had scarc more 
 than would make up hi messag . 
 ladi macbeth . give him tend ; 
 he bring great news . exit messeng . 
 the raven himself is hoars 
 that croak the fatal entranc of duncan 
 under my battlement . come , you spirit 
 that tend on mortal thought , unsex me here 
 and fill me from the crown to the toe top-ful 
 of direst cruelti ! make thick my blood , 
 stop up the access and passag to remors , 
 that no compuncti visit of natur 
 shake my fell purpos nor keep peac between 
 the effect and it ! come to my woman 's breast , 
 and take my milk for gall , your murther minist , 
 wherev in your sightless substanc 
 you wait on natur 's mischief ! come , thick night , 
 and pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell 
 that my keen knife see not the wound it make 
 nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark 
 to cri , `` hold , hold ! '' 
 
 enter macbeth . 
 
 great glami ! worthi cawdor ! 
 greater than both , by the all-hail hereaft ! 
 thi letter have transport me beyond 
 thi ignor present , and i feel now 
 the futur in the instant . 
 macbeth . my dearest love , 
 duncan come here tonight . 
 ladi macbeth . and when goe henc ? 
 macbeth . tomorrow , as he purpos . 
 ladi macbeth . o , never 
 shall sun that morrow see ! 
 your face , my thane , is as a book where men 
 may read strang matter . to beguil the time , 
 look like the time ; bear welcom in your eye , 
 your hand , your tongu ; look like the innoc flower , 
 but be the serpent under it . he that 's come 
 must be provid for ; and you shall put 
 thi night 's great busi into my dispatch , 
 which shall to all our night and day to come 
 give sole sovereign sway and masterdom . 
 macbeth . we will speak further . 
 ladi macbeth . onli look up clear ; 
 to alter favor ever is to fear . 
 leav all the rest to me . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 befor macbeth 's castl . hautboy and torch . 
 
 enter duncan , malcolm , donalbain , banquo , lennox , macduff , ross , angu , 
 and attend . 
 
 duncan . thi castl hath a pleasant seat ; the air 
 nimbl and sweetli recommend itself 
 unto our gentl sens . 
 banquo . thi guest of summer , 
 the temple-haunt martlet , doe approv 
 by hi love mansionri that the heaven 's breath 
 smell wooingli here . no jutti , friez , 
 buttress , nor coign of vantag , but thi bird 
 hath made hi pendant bed and procreant cradl ; 
 where they most breed and haunt , i have observ 
 the air is delic . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth . 
 
 duncan . see , see , our honor 'd hostess ! 
 the love that follow us sometim is our troubl , 
 which still we thank as love . herein i teach you 
 how you shall bid god 'ield us for your pain , 
 and thank us for your troubl . 
 ladi macbeth . all our servic 
 in everi point twice done , and then done doubl , 
 were poor and singl busi to contend 
 against those honor deep and broad wherewith 
 your majesti load our hous . for those of old , 
 and the late digniti heap 'd up to them , 
 we rest your hermit . 
 duncan . where 's the thane of cawdor ? 
 we cours him at the heel and had a purpos 
 to be hi purveyor ; but he ride well , 
 and hi great love , sharp as hi spur , hath holp him 
 to hi home befor us . fair and nobl hostess , 
 we are your guest tonight . 
 ladi macbeth . your servant ever 
 have their , themselv , and what is their , in compt , 
 to make their audit at your high ' pleasur , 
 still to return your own . 
 duncan . give me your hand ; 
 conduct me to mine host . we love him highli , 
 and shall continu our grace toward him . 
 by your leav , hostess . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii 
 macbeth 's castl . hautboy and torch . 
 
 enter a sewer and diver servant with dish and servic , who pass over 
 the stage . then enter macbeth . 
 
 macbeth . if it were done when 't is done , then 'twere well 
 it were done quickli . if the assassin 
 could trammel up the consequ , and catch , 
 with hi surceas , success ; that but thi blow 
 might be the be-al and the end-al -here , 
 but here , upon thi bank and shoal of time , 
 we'ld jump the life to come . but in these case 
 we still have judgement here , that we but teach 
 bloodi instruct , which be taught return 
 to plagu the inventor . thi even-hand justic 
 commend the ingredi of our poison 'd chalic 
 to our own lip . he 's here in doubl trust : 
 first , as i am hi kinsman and hi subject , 
 strong both against the deed ; then , as hi host , 
 who should against hi murther shut the door , 
 not bear the knife myself . besid , thi duncan 
 hath born hi faculti so meek , hath been 
 so clear in hi great offic , that hi virtu 
 will plead like angel trumpet-tongu against 
 the deep damnat of hi taking-off , 
 and piti , like a nake new-born babe 
 stride the blast , or heaven 's cherubin hors 
 upon the sightless courier of the air , 
 shall blow the horrid deed in everi eye , 
 that tear shall drown the wind . i have no spur 
 to prick the side of my intent , but onli 
 vault ambit , which o'erleap itself 
 and fall on the other . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth . 
 
 how now , what news ? 
 ladi macbeth . he ha almost supp 'd . whi have you left the chamber ? 
 macbeth . hath he ask 'd for me ? 
 ladi macbeth . know you not he ha ? 
 macbeth . we will proceed no further in thi busi : 
 he hath honor 'd me of late , and i have bought 
 golden opinion from all sort of peopl , 
 which would be worn now in their newest gloss , 
 not cast asid so soon . 
 ladi macbeth . wa the hope drunk 
 wherein you dress 'd yourself ? hath it slept sinc ? 
 and wake it now , to look so green and pale 
 at what it did so freeli ? from thi time 
 such i account thi love . art thou afeard 
 to be the same in thine own act and valor 
 as thou art in desir ? wouldst thou have that 
 which thou esteem'st the ornament of life 
 and live a coward in thine own esteem , 
 let `` i dare not '' wait upon `` i would '' 
 like the poor cat i ' the adag ? 
 macbeth . prithe , peac ! 
 i dare do all that may becom a man ; 
 who dare do more is none . 
 ladi macbeth . what beast wast then 
 that made you break thi enterpris to me ? 
 when you durst do it , then you were a man , 
 and , to be more than what you were , you would 
 be so much more the man . nor time nor place 
 did then adher , and yet you would make both . 
 they have made themselv , and that their fit now 
 doe unmak you . i have given suck and know 
 how tender 't is to love the babe that milk me- 
 i would , while it wa smile in my face , 
 have pluck 'd my nippl from hi boneless gum 
 and dash 'd the brain out had i so sworn as you 
 have done to thi . 
 macbeth . if we should fail ? 
 ladi macbeth . we fail ? 
 but screw your courag to the sticking-plac 
 and we 'll not fail . when duncan is asleep- 
 whereto the rather shall hi day 's hard journey 
 soundli invit him- hi two chamberlain 
 will i with wine and wassail so convinc 
 that memori , the warder of the brain , 
 shall be a fume and the receipt of reason 
 a limbeck onli . when in swinish sleep 
 their drench natur lie as in a death , 
 what can not you and i perform upon 
 the unguard duncan ? what not put upon 
 hi spongi offic , who shall bear the guilt 
 of our great quell ? 
 macbeth . bring forth men-children onli , 
 for thi undaunt mettl should compos 
 noth but male . will it not be receiv , 
 when we have mark 'd with blood those sleepi two 
 of hi own chamber and use their veri dagger , 
 that they have done't ? 
 ladi macbeth . who dare receiv it other , 
 as we shall make our grief and clamor roar 
 upon hi death ? 
 macbeth . i am settl and bend up 
 each corpor agent to thi terribl feat . 
 away , and mock the time with fairest show : 
 fals face must hide what the fals heart doth know . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 inver . court of macbeth 's castl . 
 
 enter banquo and fleanc , bear a torch befor him . 
 
 banquo . how goe the night , boy ? 
 fleanc . the moon is down ; i have not heard the clock . 
 banquo . and she goe down at twelv . 
 fleanc . i take't 't is later , sir . 
 banquo . hold , take my sword . there 's husbandri in heaven , 
 their candl are all out . take thee that too . 
 a heavi summon lie like lead upon me , 
 and yet i would not sleep . merci power , 
 restrain in me the curs thought that natur 
 give way to in repos ! 
 
 enter macbeth and a servant with a torch . 
 
 give me my sword . 
 who 's there ? 
 macbeth . a friend . 
 banquo . what , sir , not yet at rest ? the king 's abe . 
 he hath been in unusu pleasur and 
 sent forth great largess to your offic . 
 thi diamond he greet your wife withal , 
 by the name of most kind hostess , and shut up 
 in measureless content . 
 macbeth . be unprepar , 
 our will becam the servant to defect , 
 which els should free have wrought . 
 banquo . all 's well . 
 i dreamt last night of the three weird sister : 
 to you they have show 'd some truth . 
 macbeth . i think not of them ; 
 yet , when we can entreat an hour to serv , 
 we would spend it in some word upon that busi , 
 if you would grant the time . 
 banquo . at your kind'st leisur . 
 macbeth . if you shall cleav to my consent , when 't is , 
 it shall make honor for you . 
 banquo . so i lose none 
 in seek to augment it , but still keep 
 my bosom franchis and allegi clear , 
 i shall be counsel 'd . 
 macbeth . good repos the while . 
 banquo . thank , sir , the like to you . 
 exeunt banquo . and fleanc . 
 macbeth . go bid thi mistress , when my drink is readi , 
 she strike upon the bell . get thee to bed . exit servant . 
 is thi a dagger which i see befor me , 
 the handl toward my hand ? come , let me clutch thee . 
 i have thee not , and yet i see thee still . 
 art thou not , fatal vision , sensibl 
 to feel as to sight ? or art thou but 
 a dagger of the mind , a fals creation , 
 proceed from the heat-oppress brain ? 
 i see thee yet , in form as palpabl 
 as thi which now i draw . 
 thou marshal'st me the way that i wa go , 
 and such an instrument i wa to use . 
 mine eye are made the fool o ' the other sens , 
 or els worth all the rest . i see thee still , 
 and on thi blade and dudgeon gout of blood , 
 which wa not so befor . there 's no such thing : 
 it is the bloodi busi which inform 
 thu to mine eye . now o'er the one half-world 
 natur seem dead , and wick dream abus 
 the curtain 'd sleep ; witchcraft celebr 
 pale hecat 's offer ; and wither 'd murther , 
 alarum 'd by hi sentinel , the wolf , 
 whose howl 's hi watch , thu with hi stealthi pace , 
 with tarquin 's ravish stride , toward hi design 
 move like a ghost . thou sure and firm-set earth , 
 hear not my step , which way they walk , for fear 
 thi veri stone prate of my whereabout , 
 and take the present horror from the time , 
 which now suit with it . while i threat , he live ; 
 word to the heat of deed too cold breath give . 
 a bell ring . 
 i go , and it is done ; the bell invit me . 
 hear it not , duncan , for it is a knell 
 that summon thee to heaven , or to hell . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the same . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth . 
 
 ladi macbeth . that which hath made them drunk hath made me bold ; 
 what hath quench 'd them hath given me fire . hark ! peac ! 
 it wa the owl that shriek 'd , the fatal bellman , 
 which give the stern'st good night . he is about it : 
 the door are open , and the surfeit groom 
 do mock their charg with snore . i have drugg 'd their posset 
 that death and natur do contend about them , 
 whether they live or die . 
 macbeth . [ within . ] who 's there ' what , ho ! 
 ladi macbeth . alack , i am afraid they have awak 
 and 't is not done . the attempt and not the deed 
 confound us . hark ! i laid their dagger readi ; 
 he could not miss 'em . had he not resembl 
 my father as he slept , i had done't . 
 
 enter macbeth , 
 
 my husband ! 
 macbeth . i have done the deed . didst thou not hear a nois ? 
 ladi macbeth . i heard the owl scream and the cricket cri . 
 did not you speak ? 
 macbeth . when ? 
 ladi macbeth . now . 
 macbeth . as i descend ? 
 ladi macbeth . ay . 
 macbeth . hark ! 
 who lie i ' the second chamber ? 
 ladi macbeth . donalbain . 
 macbeth . thi is a sorri sight . [ look on hi hand . 
 ladi macbeth . a foolish thought , to say a sorri sight . 
 macbeth . there 's one did laugh in 's sleep , and one cri , 
 `` murther ! '' 
 that they did wake each other . i stood and heard them , 
 but they did say their prayer and address 'd them 
 again to sleep . 
 ladi macbeth . there are two lodg togeth . 
 macbeth . one cri , `` god bless us ! '' and `` amen '' the other , 
 as they had seen me with these hangman 's hand . 
 listen their fear , i could not say `` amen , '' 
 when they did say , `` god bless us ! '' 
 ladi macbeth . consid it not so deepli . 
 macbeth . but wherefor could not i pronounc `` amen '' ? 
 i had most need of bless , and `` amen '' 
 stuck in my throat . 
 ladi macbeth . these deed must not be thought 
 after these way ; so , it will make us mad . 
 macbeth . i heard a voic cri , `` sleep no more ! 
 macbeth doe murther sleep '' -the innoc sleep , 
 sleep that knit up the ravel 'd sleav of care , 
 the death of each day 's life , sore labor 's bath , 
 balm of hurt mind , great natur 's second cours , 
 chief nourish in life 's feast- 
 ladi macbeth . what do you mean ? 
 macbeth . still it cri , `` sleep no more ! '' to all the hous ; 
 `` glami hath murther 'd sleep , and therefor cawdor 
 shall sleep no more . macbeth shall sleep no more . '' 
 ladi macbeth . who wa it that thu cri ? whi , worthi thane , 
 you do unbend your nobl strength , to think 
 so brainsickli of thing . go , get some water 
 and wash thi filthi wit from your hand . 
 whi did you bring these dagger from the place ? 
 they must lie there . go carri them , and smear 
 the sleepi groom with blood . 
 macbeth . i 'll go no more . 
 i am afraid to think what i have done ; 
 look o n't again i dare not . 
 ladi macbeth . infirm of purpos ! 
 give me the dagger . the sleep and the dead 
 are but as pictur ; 't is the eye of childhood 
 that fear a paint devil . if he do bleed , 
 i 'll gild the face of the groom withal , 
 for it must seem their guilt . exit . knock within . 
 macbeth . whenc is that knock ? 
 how is't with me , when everi nois appal me ? 
 what hand are here ? ha , they pluck out mine eye ! 
 will all great neptun 's ocean wash thi blood 
 clean from my hand ? no , thi my hand will rather 
 the multitudin sea incarnadin , 
 make the green one red . 
 
 re-ent ladi macbeth . 
 
 ladi macbeth . my hand are of your color , but i shame 
 to wear a heart so white . [ knock within . ] i hear knock 
 at the south entri . retir we to our chamber . 
 a littl water clear us of thi deed . 
 how easi is it then ! your constanc 
 hath left you unattend . [ knock within . ] hark , more knock . 
 get on your nightgown , lest occas call us 
 and show us to be watcher . be not lost 
 so poorli in your thought . 
 macbeth . to know my deed , 'twere best not know myself . 
 knock within . 
 wake duncan with thi knock ! i would thou couldst ! 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the same . 
 
 enter a porter . knock within . 
 
 porter . here 's a knock inde ! if a man were porter of hell 
 gate , he should have old turn the key . [ knock within . ] 
 knock , knock , knock ! who 's there , i ' the name of belzebub ? here 's 
 a farmer that hang himself on th ' expect of plenti . come 
 in time ! have napkin enow about you ; here you 'll sweat fort . 
 [ knock within . ] knock , knock ! who 's there , in th ' other 
 devil 's name ? faith , here 's an equivoc that could swear in 
 both the scale against either scale , who commit treason 
 enough for god 's sake , yet could not equivoc to heaven . o , 
 come in , equivoc . [ knock within . ] knock , knock , knock ! 
 who 's there ? faith , here 's an english tailor come hither , for 
 steal out of a french hose . come in , tailor ; here you may 
 roast your goos . [ knock within . ] knock , knock ! never at 
 quiet ! what are you ? but thi place is too cold for hell . i 'll 
 devil-port it no further . i had thought to have let in some of 
 all profess , that go the primros way to the everlast 
 bonfir . [ knock within . ] anon , anon ! i pray you , rememb the 
 porter . 
 open the gate . 
 
 enter macduff and lennox . 
 
 macduff . wa it so late , friend , ere you went to bed , 
 that you do lie so late ? 
 porter . faith , sir , we were carous till the second cock ; and 
 drink , sir , is a great provok of three thing . 
 macduff . what three thing doe drink especi provok ? 
 porter . marri , sir , nose-paint , sleep , and urin . lecheri , sir , 
 it provok and unprovok : it provok the desir , but it take 
 away the perform . therefor much drink may be said to be an 
 equivoc with lecheri : it make him , and it mar him ; it set 
 him on , and it take him off ; it persuad him and dishearten 
 him ; make him stand to and not stand to ; in conclus , 
 equivoc him in a sleep , and give him the lie , leav him . 
 macduff . i believ drink gave thee the lie last night . 
 porter . that it did , sir , i ' the veri throat on me ; but requit 
 him for hi lie , and , i think , be too strong for him , though 
 he took up my leg sometim , yet i made shift to cast him . 
 macduff . is thi master stir ? 
 
 enter macbeth . 
 
 our knock ha awak him ; here he come . 
 lennox . good morrow , nobl sir . 
 macbeth . morrow , both . 
 macduff . is the king stir , worthi thane ? 
 macbeth . not yet . 
 macduff . he did command me to call time on him ; 
 i have almost slipp 'd the hour . 
 macbeth . i 'll bring you to him . 
 macduff . i know thi is a joy troubl to you , 
 but yet 't is one . 
 macbeth . the labor we delight in physic pain . 
 thi is the door . 
 macduff i 'll make so bold to call , 
 for 't is my limit servic . exit . 
 lennox . goe the king henc today ? 
 macbeth . he doe ; he did appoint so . 
 lennox . the night ha been unruli . where we lay , 
 our chimney were blown down , and , as they say , 
 lament heard i ' the air , strang scream of death , 
 and prophesi with accent terribl 
 of dire combust and confus event 
 new hatch 'd to the woeful time . the obscur bird 
 clamor 'd the livelong night . some say the earth 
 wa fever and did shake . 
 macbeth . 't wa a rough fight . 
 lennox . my young remembr can not parallel 
 a fellow to it . 
 
 re-ent macduff . 
 
 macduff . o horror , horror , horror ! tongu nor heart 
 can not conceiv nor name thee . 
 macbeth . lennox . what 's the matter ? 
 macduff . confus now hath made hi masterpiec . 
 most sacrilegi murther hath broke ope 
 the lord 's anoint templ and stole thenc 
 the life o ' the build . 
 macbeth . what is't you say ? the life ? 
 lennox . mean you hi majesti ? 
 macduff . approach the chamber , and destroy your sight 
 with a new gorgon . do not bid me speak ; 
 see , and then speak yourselv . 
 exeunt macbeth and lennox . 
 awak , awak ! 
 ring the alarum bell . murther and treason ! 
 banquo and donalbain ! malcolm , awak ! 
 shake off thi downi sleep , death 's counterfeit , 
 and look on death itself ! up , up , and see 
 the great doom 's imag ! malcolm ! banquo ! 
 as from your grave rise up , and walk like sprite 
 to counten thi horror ! ring the bell . bell ring . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth . 
 
 ladi macbeth . what 's the busi , 
 that such a hideou trumpet call to parley 
 the sleeper of the hous ? speak , speak ! 
 macduff . o gentl ladi , 
 't is not for you to hear what i can speak : 
 the repetit in a woman 's ear 
 would murther as it fell . 
 
 enter banquo . 
 
 o banquo , banquo ! 
 our royal master 's murther 'd . 
 ladi macbeth . woe , ala ! 
 what , in our hous ? 
 banquo . too cruel anywher . 
 dear duff , i prithe , contradict thyself , 
 and say it is not so . 
 
 re-ent macbeth and lennox , with ross . 
 
 macbeth . had i but die an hour befor thi chanc , 
 i had live a bless time , for from thi instant 
 there 's noth seriou in mortal . 
 all is but toy ; renown and grace is dead , 
 the wine of life is drawn , and the mere lee 
 is left thi vault to brag of . 
 
 enter malcolm and donalbain . 
 
 donalbain . what is amiss ? 
 macbeth . you are , and do not know't . 
 the spring , the head , the fountain of your blood 
 is stop , the veri sourc of it is stopp 'd . 
 macduff . your royal father 's murther 'd . 
 malcolm . o , by whom ? 
 lennox . those of hi chamber , as it seem 'd , had done't . 
 their hand and face were all badg with blood ; 
 so were their dagger , which unwip we found 
 upon their pillow . 
 they stare , and were distract ; no man 's life 
 wa to be trust with them . 
 macbeth . o , yet i do repent me of my furi , 
 that i did kill them . 
 macduff . wherefor did you so ? 
 macbeth . who can be wise , amaz , temper and furiou , 
 loyal and neutral , in a moment ? no man . 
 the expedit of my violent love 
 outrun the pauser reason . here lay duncan , 
 hi silver skin lace with hi golden blood , 
 and hi gash 'd stab look 'd like a breach in natur 
 for ruin 's wast entranc ; there , the murther , 
 steep 'd in the color of their trade , their dagger 
 unmannerli breech 'd with gore . who could refrain , 
 that had a heart to love , and in that heart 
 courag to make 's love known ? 
 ladi macbeth . help me henc , ho ! 
 macduff . look to the ladi . 
 malcolm . [ asid to donalbain . ] whi do we hold our tongu , 
 that most may claim thi argument for our ? 
 donalbain . [ asid to malcolm . ] what should be spoken here , where 
 our fate , 
 hid in an auger hole , may rush and seiz us ? 
 let 's away , 
 our tear are not yet brew 'd . 
 malcolm . [ asid to donalbain . ] nor our strong sorrow 
 upon the foot of motion . 
 banquo . look to the ladi . 
 ladi macbeth is carri out . 
 and when we have our nake frailti hid , 
 that suffer in exposur , let us meet 
 and question thi most bloodi piec of work 
 to know it further . fear and scrupl shake us . 
 in the great hand of god i stand , and thenc 
 against the undivulg pretens i fight 
 of treason malic . 
 macduff . and so do i . 
 all . so all . 
 macbeth . let 's briefli put on manli readi 
 and meet i ' the hall togeth . 
 all . well content . 
 exeunt all but malcolm and donalbain . 
 malcolm . what will you do ? let 's not consort with them . 
 to show an unfelt sorrow is an offic 
 which the fals man doe easi . i 'll to england . 
 donalbain . to ireland , i ; our separ fortun 
 shall keep us both the safer . where we are 
 there 's dagger in men 's smile ; the near in blood , 
 the nearer bloodi . 
 malcolm . thi murther shaft that 's shot 
 hath not yet light , and our safest way 
 is to avoid the aim . therefor to hors ; 
 and let us not be dainti of leave-tak , 
 but shift away . there 's warrant in that theft 
 which steal itself when there 's no merci left . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 outsid macbeth 's castl . 
 
 enter ross with an old man . 
 
 old man . threescor and ten i can rememb well , 
 within the volum of which time i have seen 
 hour dread and thing strang , but thi sore night 
 hath trifl former know . 
 ross . ah , good father , 
 thou seest the heaven , as troubl with man 's act , 
 threaten hi bloodi stage . by the clock 't is day , 
 and yet dark night strangl the travel lamp . 
 is't night 's predomin , or the day 's shame , 
 that dark doe the face of earth entomb , 
 when live light should kiss it ? 
 old man . 't is unnatur , 
 even like the deed that 's done . on tuesday last 
 a falcon tower in her pride of place 
 wa by a mous owl hawk 'd at and kill 'd . 
 ross . and duncan 's horses-a thing most strang and certain- 
 beauteou and swift , the minion of their race , 
 turn 'd wild in natur , broke their stall , flung out , 
 contend 'gainst obedi , as they would make 
 war with mankind . 
 old man . 't is said they eat each other . 
 ross . they did so , to the amaz of mine eye 
 that look 'd upo n't . 
 
 enter macduff . 
 
 here come the good macduff . 
 how goe the world , sir , now ? 
 macduff . whi , see you not ? 
 ross . is't known who did thi more than bloodi deed ? 
 macduff . those that macbeth hath slain . 
 ross . ala , the day ! 
 what good could they pretend ? 
 macduff . they were suborn 'd : 
 malcolm and donalbain , the king 's two son , 
 are stol'n away and fled , which put upon them 
 suspicion of the deed . 
 ross . 'gainst natur still ! 
 thriftless ambit , that wilt ravin up 
 thine own life 's mean ! then 't is most like 
 the sovereignti will fall upon macbeth . 
 macduff . he is alreadi name , and gone to scone 
 to be invest . 
 ross . where is duncan 's bodi ? 
 macduff . carri to colmekil , 
 the sacr storehous of hi predecessor 
 and guardian of their bone . 
 ross . will you to scone ? 
 macduff . no , cousin , i 'll to fife . 
 ross . well , i will thither . 
 macduff . well , may you see thing well done there . 
 adieu , 
 lest our old robe sit easier than our new ! 
 ross . farewel , father . 
 old man . god 's benison go with you and with those 
 that would make good of bad and friend of foe ! 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 forr . the palac . 
 
 enter banquo . 
 
 banquo . thou hast it now : king , cawdor , glami , all , 
 as the weird women promis , and i fear 
 thou play'dst most foulli for't ; yet it wa said 
 it should not stand in thi poster , 
 but that myself should be the root and father 
 of mani king . if there come truth from them 
 ( as upon thee , macbeth , their speech shine ) 
 whi , by the veriti on thee made good , 
 may they not be my oracl as well 
 and set me up in hope ? but hush , no more . 
 
 sennet sound . enter macbeth as king , ladi macbeth 
 as queen , lennox , ross , lord , ladi , and attend . 
 
 macbeth . here 's our chief guest . 
 ladi macbeth . if he had been forgotten , 
 it had been as a gap in our great feast 
 and all thing unbecom . 
 macbeth . tonight we hold a solemn supper , sir , 
 and i 'll request your presenc . 
 banquo . let your high 
 command upon me , to the which my duti 
 are with a most indissolubl tie 
 forev knit . 
 macbeth . ride you thi afternoon ? 
 banquo . ay , my good lord . 
 macbeth . we should have els desir your good advic , 
 which still hath been both grave and prosper 
 in thi day 's council ; but we 'll take tomorrow . 
 is't far you ride ' ! 
 banquo . as far , my lord , as will fill up the time 
 'twixt thi and supper . go not my hors the better , 
 i must becom a borrow of the night 
 for a dark hour or twain . 
 macbeth . fail not our feast . 
 banquo . my lord , i will not . 
 macbeth . we hear our bloodi cousin are bestow 'd 
 in england and in ireland , not confess 
 their cruel parricid , fill their hearer 
 with strang invent . but of that tomorrow , 
 when therewith we shall have caus of state 
 crave us jointli . hie you to hors ; adieu , 
 till you return at night . goe fleanc with you ? 
 banquo . ay , my good lord . our time doe call upon 's . 
 macbeth . i wish your hors swift and sure of foot , 
 and so i do commend you to their back . 
 farewel . exit banquo . 
 let everi man be master of hi time 
 till seven at night ; to make societi 
 the sweeter welcom , we will keep ourself 
 till supper time alon . while then , god be with you ! 
 exeunt all but macbeth and an attend . 
 sirrah , a word with you . attend those men 
 our pleasur ? 
 attend . they are , my lord , without the palac gate . 
 macbeth . bring them befor us . exit attend . 
 to be thu is noth , 
 but to be safe thu . our fear in banquo . 
 stick deep , and in hi royalti of natur 
 reign that which would be fear 'd . 't is much he dare , 
 and , to that dauntless temper of hi mind , 
 he hath a wisdom that doth guid hi valor 
 to act in safeti . there is none but he 
 whose be i do fear ; and under him 
 my geniu is rebuk , as it is said 
 mark antoni 's wa by caesar . he chid the sister 
 when first they put the name of king upon me 
 and bade them speak to him ; then prophet-lik 
 they hail 'd him father to a line of king . 
 upon my head they place a fruitless crown 
 and put a barren sceptr in my gripe , 
 thenc to be wrench 'd with an unlin hand , 
 no son of mine succeed . if't be so , 
 for banquo 's issu have i file my mind , 
 for them the graciou duncan have i murther 'd , 
 put rancor in the vessel of my peac 
 onli for them , and mine etern jewel 
 given to the common enemi of man , 
 to make them king -the seed of banquo king ! 
 rather than so , come , fate , into the list , 
 and champion me to the utter ! who 's there ? 
 
 re-ent attend , with two murther . 
 
 now go to the door , and stay there till we call . 
 exit attend . 
 wa it not yesterday we spoke togeth ? 
 first murther . it wa , so pleas your high . 
 macbeth . well then , now 
 have you consid 'd of my speech ? know 
 that it wa he in the time past which held you 
 so under fortun , which you thought had been 
 our innoc self ? thi i made good to you 
 in our last confer , pass 'd in probat with you : 
 how you were born in hand , how cross 'd , the instrument , 
 who wrought with them , and all thing els that might 
 to half a soul and to a notion craze 
 say , `` thu did banquo . '' 
 first murther . you made it known to us . 
 macbeth . i did so , and went further , which is now 
 our point of second meet . do you find 
 your patienc so predomin in your natur , 
 that you can let thi go ? are you so gospel 'd , 
 to pray for thi good man and for hi issu , 
 whose heavi hand hath bow 'd you to the grave 
 and beggar 'd your forev ? 
 first murther . we are men , my lieg . 
 macbeth . ay , in the catalogu ye go for men , 
 as hound and greyhound , mongrel , spaniel , cur , 
 shough , waterrug , and demi-wolv are clept 
 all by the name of dog . the valu file 
 distinguish the swift , the slow , the subtl , 
 the housekeep , the hunter , everi one 
 accord to the gift which bounteou natur 
 hath in him close , wherebi he doe receiv 
 particular addit , from the bill 
 that write them all alik ; and so of men . 
 now if you have a station in the file , 
 not i ' the worst rank of manhood , say it , 
 and i will put that busi in your bosom 
 whose execut take your enemi off , 
 grappl you to the heart and love of us , 
 who wear our health but sickli in hi life , 
 which in hi death were perfect . 
 second murther . i am one , my lieg , 
 whom the vile blow and buffet of the world 
 have so incens that i am reckless what 
 i do to spite the world . 
 first murther . and i anoth 
 so weari with disast , tugg 'd with fortun , 
 that i would set my life on ani chanc , 
 to mend it or be rid o n't . 
 macbeth . both of you 
 know banquo wa your enemi . 
 both murther . true , my lord . 
 macbeth . so is he mine , and in such bloodi distanc 
 that everi minut of hi be thrust 
 against my near'st of life ; and though i could 
 with barefac power sweep him from my sight 
 and bid my will avouch it , yet i must not , 
 for certain friend that are both hi and mine , 
 whose love i may not drop , but wail hi fall 
 who i myself struck down . and thenc it is 
 that i to your assist do make love , 
 mask the busi from the common eye 
 for sundri weighti reason . 
 second murther . we shall , my lord , 
 perform what you command us . 
 first murther . though our lives- 
 macbeth . your spirit shine through you . within thi hour at most 
 i will advis you where to plant yourselv , 
 acquaint you with the perfect spi o ' the time , 
 the moment o n't ; fort must be done tonight 
 and someth from the palac ( alway thought 
 that i requir a clear ) ; and with him- 
 to leav no rub nor botch in the work- 
 fleanc hi son , that keep him compani , 
 whose absenc is no less materi to me 
 than is hi father 's , must embrac the fate 
 of that dark hour . resolv yourselv apart ; 
 i 'll come to you anon . 
 both murther . we are resolv , my lord . 
 macbeth . i 'll call upon you straight . abid within . 
 exeunt murther . 
 it is conclud : banquo , thi soul 's flight , 
 if it find heaven , must find it out tonight . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the palac . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth and a servant . 
 
 ladi macbeth . is banquo gone from court ? 
 servant . ay , madam , but return again tonight . 
 ladi macbeth . say to the king i would attend hi leisur 
 for a few word . 
 servant . madam , i will . exit . 
 ladi macbeth . nought 's had , all 's spent , 
 where our desir is got without content . 
 't is safer to be that which we destroy 
 than by destruct dwell in doubt joy . 
 
 enter macbeth . 
 
 how now , my lord ? whi do you keep alon , 
 of sorriest fanci your companion make , 
 use those thought which should inde have die 
 with them they think on ? thing without all remedi 
 should be without regard . what 's done is done . 
 macbeth . we have scotch 'd the snake , not kill 'd it . 
 she 'll close and be herself , whilst our poor malic 
 remain in danger of her former tooth . 
 but let the frame of thing disjoint , both the world suffer , 
 ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep 
 in the afflict of these terribl dream 
 that shake us nightli . better be with the dead , 
 whom we , to gain our peac , have sent to peac , 
 than on the tortur of the mind to lie 
 in restless ecstasi . duncan is in hi grave ; 
 after life 's fit fever he sleep well . 
 treason ha done hi worst ; nor steel , nor poison , 
 malic domest , foreign levi , noth , 
 can touch him further . 
 ladi macbeth . come on , 
 gentl my lord , sleek o'er your rug look ; 
 be bright and jovial among your guest tonight . 
 macbeth . so shall i , love , and so , i pray , be you . 
 let your remembr appli to banquo ; 
 present him emin , both with eye and tongu : 
 unsaf the while , that we 
 must lave our honor in these flatter stream , 
 and make our face vizard to our heart , 
 disguis what they are . 
 ladi macbeth . you must leav thi . 
 macbeth . o , full of scorpion is my mind , dear wife ! 
 thou know'st that banquo and hi fleanc live . 
 ladi macbeth . but in them natur 's copi 's not etern . 
 macbeth . there 's comfort yet ; they are assail . 
 then be thou jocund . ere the bat hath flown 
 hi cloister 'd flight , ere to black hecat 's summon 
 the shard-born beetl with hi drowsi hum 
 hath rung night 's yawn peal , there shall be done 
 a deed of dread note . 
 ladi macbeth . what 's to be done ? 
 macbeth . be innoc of the knowledg , dearest chuck , 
 till thou applaud the deed . come , seel night , 
 scarf up the tender eye of piti day , 
 and with thi bloodi and invis hand 
 cancel and tear to piec that great bond 
 which keep me pale ! light thicken , and the crow 
 make wing to the rooki wood ; 
 good thing of day begin to droop and drows , 
 while night 's black agent to their prey do rous . 
 thou marvel'st at my word , but hold thee still : 
 thing bad begun make strong themselv by ill. 
 so , prithe , go with me . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a park near the palac . 
 
 enter three murther . 
 
 first murther . but who did bid thee join with us ? 
 third murther . macbeth . 
 second murther . he need not our mistrust , sinc he deliv 
 our offic and what we have to do 
 to the direct just . 
 first murther . then stand with us . 
 the west yet glimmer with some streak of day ; 
 now spur the late travel apac 
 to gain the time inn , and near approach 
 the subject of our watch . 
 third murther . hark ! i hear hors . 
 banquo . [ within . ] give us a light there , ho ! 
 second murther . then 't is he ; the rest 
 that are within the note of expect 
 alreadi are i ' the court . 
 first murther . hi hors go about . 
 third murther . almost a mile , but he doe usually- 
 so all men do -from henc to the palac gate 
 make it their walk . 
 second murther . a light , a light ! 
 
 enter banquo , and fleanc with a torch . 
 
 third murther . 't is he . 
 first murther . stand to't . 
 banquo . it will be rain tonight . 
 first murther . let it come down . 
 they set upon banquo . 
 banquo . o , treacheri ! fli , good fleanc , fli , fli , fli ! 
 thou mayst reveng . o slave ! die . fleanc escap . 
 third murther . who did strike out the light ? 
 first murther . wast not the way ? 
 third murther . there 's but one down ; the son is fled . 
 second murther . we have lost 
 best half of our affair . 
 first murther . well , let 's away and say how much is done . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 a hall in the palac . a banquet prepar . 
 
 enter macbeth , ladi macbeth , ross , lennox , lord , and attend . 
 
 macbeth . you know your own degre ; sit down . at first 
 and last the hearti welcom . 
 lord . thank to your majesti . 
 macbeth . ourself will mingl with societi 
 and play the humbl host . 
 our hostess keep her state , but in best time 
 we will requir her welcom . 
 ladi macbeth . pronounc it for me , sir , to all our friend , 
 for my heart speak they are welcom . 
 
 enter first murther to the door . 
 
 macbeth . see , they encount thee with their heart ' thank . 
 both side are even ; here i 'll sit i ' the midst . 
 be larg in mirth ; anon we 'll drink a measur 
 the tabl round . [ approach the door . ] there 's blood upon thi 
 face . 
 murther . 't is banquo 's then . 
 macbeth . 't is better thee without than he within . 
 is he dispatch 'd ? 
 murther . my lord , hi throat is cut ; that i did for him . 
 macbeth . thou art the best o ' the cut-throat ! yet he 's good 
 that did the like for fleanc . if thou didst it , 
 thou art the nonpareil . 
 murther . most royal sir , 
 fleanc is 'scape . 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] then come my fit again . i had els been perfect , 
 whole as the marbl , found as the rock , 
 as broad and gener as the case air ; 
 but now i am cabin 'd , cribb 'd , confin 'd , bound in 
 to sauci doubt and fear -but banquo 's safe ? 
 murther . ay , my good lord . safe in a ditch he bide , 
 with twenti trench gash on hi head , 
 the least a death to natur . 
 macbeth . thank for that . 
 there the grown serpent lie ; the worm that 's fled 
 hath natur that in time will venom breed , 
 no teeth for the present . get thee gone . tomorrow 
 we 'll hear ourselv again . 
 exit murther . 
 ladi macbeth . my royal lord , 
 you do not give the cheer . the feast is sold 
 that is not often vouch 'd , while 't is amak , 
 't is given with welcom . to feed were best at home ; 
 from thenc the sauc to meat is ceremoni ; 
 meet were bare without it . 
 macbeth . sweet remembranc ! 
 now good digest wait on appetit , 
 and health on both ! 
 lennox . may't pleas your high sit . 
 
 the ghost of banquo enter and sit in macbeth 's place . 
 
 macbeth . here had we now our countri 's honor roof 'd , 
 were the grace person of our banquo present , 
 who may i rather challeng for unkind 
 than piti for mischanc ! 
 ross . hi absenc , sir , 
 lay blame upon hi promis . please't your high 
 to grace us with your royal compani ? 
 macbeth . the tabl 's full . 
 lennox . here is a place reserv , sir . 
 macbeth . where ? 
 lennox . here , my good lord . what is't that move your high ? 
 macbeth . which of you have done thi ? 
 lord . what , my good lord ? 
 macbeth . thou canst not say i did it ; never shake 
 thi gori lock at me . 
 ross . gentlemen , rise ; hi high is well . 
 ladi macbeth . sit , worthi friend ; my lord is often thu , 
 and hath been from hi youth . pray you , keep seat . 
 the fit is momentari ; upon a thought 
 he will again be well . if much you note him , 
 you shall offend him and extend hi passion . 
 feed , and regard him not-ar you a man ? 
 macbeth . ay , and a bold one , that dare look on that 
 which might appal the devil . 
 ladi macbeth . o proper stuff ! 
 thi is the veri paint of your fear ; 
 thi is the air-drawn dagger which you said 
 led you to duncan . o , these flaw and start , 
 impostor to true fear , would well becom 
 a woman 's stori at a winter 's fire , 
 author by her grandam . shame itself ! 
 whi do you make such face ? when all 's done , 
 you look but on a stool . 
 macbeth . prithe , see there ! behold ! look ! lo ! how say you ? 
 whi , what care i ? if thou canst nod , speak too . 
 if charnel hous and our grave must send 
 those that we buri back , our monument 
 shall be the maw of kite . exit ghost . 
 ladi macbeth . what , quit unmann 'd in folli ? 
 macbeth . if i stand here , i saw him . 
 ladi macbeth . fie , for shame ! 
 macbeth . blood hath been shed ere now , i ' the olden time , 
 ere human statut purg the gentl weal ; 
 ay , and sinc too , murther have been perform 'd 
 too terribl for the ear . the time ha been , 
 that , when the brain were out , the man would die , 
 and there an end ; but now they rise again , 
 with twenti mortal murther on their crown , 
 and push us from our stool . thi is more strang 
 than such a murther is . 
 ladi macbeth . my worthi lord , 
 your nobl friend do lack you . 
 macbeth . i do forget . 
 do not muse at me , my most worthi friend . 
 i have a strang infirm , which is noth 
 to those that know me . come , love and health to all ; 
 then i 'll sit down . give me some wine , fill full . 
 i drink to the gener joy o ' the whole tabl , 
 and to our dear friend banquo , whom we miss . 
 would he were here ! to all and him we thirst , 
 and all to all . 
 lord . our duti and the pledg . 
 
 re-ent ghost . 
 
 macbeth . avaunt , and quit my sight ! let the earth hide thee ! 
 thi bone are marrowless , thi blood is cold ; 
 thou hast no specul in those eye 
 which thou dost glare with . 
 ladi macbeth . think of thi , good peer , 
 but as a thing of custom . 't is no other , 
 onli it spoil the pleasur of the time . 
 macbeth . what man dare , i dare . 
 approach thou like the rug russian bear , 
 the arm 'd rhinocero , or the hyrcan tiger ; 
 take ani shape but that , and my firm nerv 
 shall never trembl . or be aliv again , 
 and dare me to the desert with thi sword . 
 if trembl i inhabit then , protest me 
 the babi of a girl . henc , horribl shadow ! 
 unreal mockeri , henc ! exit ghost . 
 whi , so , be gone , 
 i am a man again . pray you sit still . 
 ladi macbeth . you have displac the mirth , broke the good meet , 
 with most admir disord . 
 macbeth . can such thing be , 
 and overcom us like a summer 's cloud , 
 without our special wonder ? you make me strang 
 even to the disposit that i owe 
 when now i think you can behold such sight 
 and keep the natur rubi of your cheek 
 when mine is blanch 'd with fear . 
 ross . what sight , my lord ? 
 ladi macbeth . i pray you , speak not ; he grow wors and wors ; 
 question enrag him . at onc , good night . 
 stand not upon the order of your go , 
 but go at onc . 
 lennox . good night , and better health 
 attend hi majesti ! 
 ladi macbeth . a kind good night to all ! 
 exeunt all but macbeth and ladi macbeth . 
 macbeth . will have blood ; they say blood will have blood . 
 stone have been known to move and tree to speak ; 
 augur and understood relat have 
 by maggot pie and chough and rook brought forth 
 the secret'st man of blood . what is the night ? 
 ladi macbeth . almost at odd with morn , which is which . 
 macbeth . how say'st thou , that macduff deni hi person 
 at our great bid ? 
 ladi macbeth . did you send to him , sir ? 
 macbeth . i hear it by the way , but i will send . 
 there 's not a one of them but in hi hous 
 i keep a servant feed . i will tomorrow , 
 and betim i will , to the weird sister . 
 more shall they speak ; for now i am bent to know , 
 by the worst mean , the worst . for mine own good 
 all caus shall give way . i am in blood 
 stepp 'd in so far that , should i wade no more , 
 return were as tediou as go o'er . 
 strang thing i have in head that will to hand , 
 which must be act ere they may be scann 'd . 
 ladi macbeth . you lack the season of all natur , sleep . 
 macbeth . come , we 'll to sleep . my strang and self-abus 
 is the initi fear that want hard use . 
 we are yet but young in deed . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 a heath . thunder . 
 
 enter the three witch , meet hecat . 
 
 first witch . whi , how now , hecat ? you look angerli . 
 hecat . have i not reason , beldam as you are , 
 sauci and overbold ? how did you dare 
 to trade and traffic with macbeth 
 in riddl and affair of death , 
 and i , the mistress of your charm , 
 the close contriv of all harm , 
 wa never call 'd to bear my part , 
 or show the glori of our art ? 
 and , which is wors , all you have done 
 hath been but for a wayward son , 
 spite and wrath , who , as other do , 
 love for hi own end , not for you . 
 but make amend now . get you gone , 
 and at the pit of acheron 
 meet me i ' the morn . thither he 
 will come to know hi destini . 
 your vessel and your spell provid , 
 your charm and everyth besid . 
 i am for the air ; thi night i 'll spend 
 unto a dismal and a fatal end . 
 great busi must be wrought ere noon : 
 upon the corner of the moon 
 there hang a vapor drop profound ; 
 i 'll catch it ere it come to ground . 
 and that distil 'd by magic sleight 
 shall rais such artifici sprite 
 as by the strength of their illus 
 shall draw him on to hi confus . 
 he shall spurn fate , scorn death , and bear 
 hi hope 'bove wisdom , grace , and fear . 
 and you all know secur 
 is mortal ' chiefest enemi . 
 music and a song within , 
 `` come away , come away . '' 
 hark ! i am call 'd ; my littl spirit , see , 
 sit in a foggi cloud and stay for me . exit . 
 first witch . come , let 's make hast ; she 'll soon be back again . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 forr . the palac . 
 
 enter lennox and anoth lord . 
 
 lennox . my former speech have but hit your thought , 
 which can interpret farther ; onli i say 
 thing 's have been strang born . the graciou duncan 
 wa piti of macbeth ; marri , he wa dead . 
 and the right valiant banquo walk 'd too late , 
 whom , you may say , if't pleas you , fleanc kill 'd , 
 for fleanc fled . men must not walk too late . 
 who can not want the thought , how monstrou 
 it wa for malcolm and for donalbain 
 to kill their graciou father ? damn fact ! 
 how it did griev macbeth ! did he not straight , 
 in piou rage , the two delinqu tear 
 that were the slave of drink and thrall of sleep ? 
 wa not that nobli done ? ay , and wise too , 
 for 'twould have anger 'd ani heart aliv 
 to hear the men deny't . so that , i say , 
 he ha born all thing well ; and i do think 
 that , had he duncan 's son under hi key- 
 as , a n't pleas heaven , he shall not -they should find 
 what 'twere to kill a father ; so should fleanc . 
 but , peac ! for from broad word , and 'caus he fail 'd 
 hi presenc at the tyrant 's feast , i hear , 
 macduff live in disgrac . sir , can you tell 
 where he bestow himself ? 
 lord . the son of duncan , 
 from whom thi tyrant hold the due of birth , 
 live in the english court and is receiv 
 of the most piou edward with such grace 
 that the malevol of fortun noth 
 take from hi high respect . thither macduff 
 is gone to pray the holi king , upon hi aid 
 to wake northumberland and warlik siward ; 
 that by the help of these , with him abov 
 to ratifi the work , we may again 
 give to our tabl meat , sleep to our night , 
 free from our feast and banquet bloodi knive , 
 do faith homag , and receiv free honors- 
 all which we pine for now . and thi report 
 hath so exasper the king that he 
 prepar for some attempt of war . 
 lennox . sent he to macduff ? 
 lord . he did , and with an absolut `` sir , not i , '' 
 the cloudi messeng turn me hi back , 
 and hum , as who should say , `` you 'll rue the time 
 that clog me with thi answer . '' 
 lennox . and that well might 
 advis him to a caution , to hold what distanc 
 hi wisdom can provid . some holi angel 
 fli to the court of england and unfold 
 hi messag ere he come , that a swift bless 
 may soon return to thi our suffer countri 
 under a hand accurs ! 
 lord . i 'll send my prayer with him . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 a cavern . in the middl , a boil cauldron . thunder . 
 
 enter the three witch . 
 first witch . thrice the brind cat hath mew 'd . 
 second witch . thrice and onc the hedge-pig whine . 
 third witch . harpier cri , `` 't is time , 't is time . '' 
 first witch . round about the cauldron go ; 
 in the poison 'd entrail throw . 
 toad , that under cold stone 
 day and night ha thirty-on 
 swelter 'd venom sleep got , 
 boil thou first i ' the charm pot . 
 all . doubl , doubl , toil and troubl ; 
 fire burn and cauldron bubbl . 
 second witch . fillet of a fenni snake , 
 in the cauldron boil and bake ; 
 eye of newt and toe of frog , 
 wool of bat and tongu of dog , 
 adder 's fork and blind-worm 's sting , 
 lizard 's leg and howlet 's wing , 
 for a charm of power troubl , 
 like a hell-broth boil and bubbl . 
 all . doubl , doubl , toil and troubl ; 
 fire burn and cauldron bubbl . 
 third witch . scale of dragon , tooth of wolf , 
 witch 's mummi , maw and gulf 
 of the ravin 'd salt-sea shark , 
 root of hemlock digg 'd i ' the dark , 
 liver of blasphem jew , 
 gall of goat and slip of yew 
 sliver 'd in the moon 's eclips , 
 nose of turk and tartar 's lip , 
 finger of birth-strangl babe 
 ditch-deliv 'd by a drab , 
 make the gruel thick and slab . 
 add thereto a tiger 's chawdron , 
 for the ingredi of our cawdron . 
 all . doubl , doubl , toil and troubl ; 
 fire burn and cauldron bubbl . 
 second witch . cool it with a baboon 's blood , 
 then the charm is firm and good . 
 
 enter hecat to the other three witch . 
 
 hecat . o , well done ! i commend your pain , 
 and everyon shall share i ' the gain . 
 and now about the cauldron sing , 
 like elv and fairi in a ring , 
 enchant all that you put in . 
 music and a song , `` black spirit . '' 
 hecat retir . 
 second witch . by the prick of my thumb , 
 someth wick thi way come . 
 open , lock , 
 whoever knock ! 
 
 enter macbeth . 
 
 macbeth . how now , you secret , black , and midnight hag ? 
 what is't you do ? 
 all . a deed without a name . 
 macbeth . i conjur you , by that which you profess 
 ( howeer you come to know it ) answer me : 
 though you unti the wind and let them fight 
 against the church , though the yesti wave 
 confound and swallow navig up , 
 though blade corn be lodg and tree blown down , 
 though castl toppl on their warder ' head , 
 though palac and pyramid do slope 
 their head to their foundat , though the treasur 
 of natur 's germain tumbl all togeth 
 even till destruct sicken , answer me 
 to what i ask you . 
 first witch . speak . 
 second witch . demand . 
 third witch . we 'll answer . 
 first witch . say , if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouth , 
 or from our master ' ? 
 macbeth . call 'em , let me see 'em . 
 first witch . pour in sow 's blood that hath eaten 
 her nine farrow ; greas that 's sweaten 
 from the murther 's gibbet throw 
 into the flame . 
 all . come , high or low ; 
 thyself and offic deftli show ! 
 
 thunder . first apparit : an arm head . 
 
 macbeth . tell me , thou unknown power- 
 first witch . he know thi thought : 
 hear hi speech , but say thou nought . 
 first apparit . macbeth ! macbeth ! macbeth ! bewar macduff , 
 bewar the thane of fife . dismiss me . enough . 
 descend . 
 macbeth . whate' thou art , for thi good caution , thank ; 
 thou hast harp 'd my fear aright . but one word more- 
 first witch . he will not be command . here 's anoth , 
 more potent than the first . 
 
 thunder . second apparit : a bloodi child . 
 
 second apparit . macbeth ! macbeth ! macbeth ! 
 macbeth . had i three ear , i 'd hear thee . 
 second apparit . be bloodi , bold , and resolut : laugh to scorn 
 the power of man , for none of woman born 
 shall harm macbeth . descend . 
 macbeth . then live , macduff . what need i fear of thee ? 
 but yet i 'll make assur doubl sure , 
 and take a bond of fate : thou shalt not live , 
 that i may tell pale-heart fear it lie , 
 and sleep in spite of thunder . 
 
 thunder . third apparit : a child crown , 
 with a tree in hi hand . 
 
 what is thi , 
 that rise like the issu of a king , 
 and wear upon hi babi brow the round 
 and top of sovereignti ? 
 all . listen , but speak not to't . 
 third apparit . be lion-mettl , proud , and take no care 
 who chafe , who fret , or where conspir are . 
 macbeth shall never vanquish 'd be until 
 great birnam wood to high dunsinan hill 
 shall come against him . descend . 
 macbeth . that will never be . 
 who can impress the forest , bid the tree 
 unfix hi earth-bound root ? sweet bodement , good ! 
 rebellion 's head , rise never till the wood 
 of birnam rise , and our high-plac macbeth 
 shall live the leas of natur , pay hi breath 
 to time and mortal custom . yet my heart 
 throb to know one thing : tell me , if your art 
 can tell so much , shall banquo 's issu ever 
 reign in thi kingdom ? 
 all . seek to know no more . 
 macbeth . i will be satisfi ! deni me thi , 
 and an etern curs fall on you ! let me know . 
 whi sink that cauldron , and what nois is thi ? 
 hautboy . 
 first witch . show ! 
 second witch . show ! 
 third . witch . show ! 
 all . show hi eye , and griev hi heart ; 
 come like shadow , so depart ! 
 
 a show of eight king , the last with a glass in hi hand ; 
 banquo 's ghost follow . 
 
 macbeth . thou are too like the spirit of banquo down ! 
 thi crown doe sear mine eyebal . and thi hair , 
 thou other gold-bound brow , is like the first . 
 a third is like the former . filthi hag ! 
 whi do you show me thi ? a fourth ! start , eye ! 
 what , will the line stretch out to the crack of doom ? 
 anoth yet ! a seventh ! i 'll see no more ! 
 and yet the eighth appear , who bear a glass 
 which show me mani more ; and some i see 
 that twofold ball and trebl sceptr carri . 
 horribl sight ! now i see 't is true ; 
 for the blood-bolt 'd banquo smile upon me , 
 and point at them for hi . what , is thi so ? 
 first witch . ay , sir , all thi is so . but whi 
 stand macbeth thu amazedli ? 
 come , sister , cheer we up hi sprite , 
 and show the best of our delight . 
 i 'll charm the air to give a sound , 
 while you perform your antic round , 
 that thi great king may kindli say 
 our duti did hi welcom pay . 
 music . the witch danc and 
 then vanish with hecat . 
 macbeth . are they ? gone ? let thi pernici hour 
 stand ay accurs in the calendar ! 
 come in , without there ! 
 
 enter lennox . 
 
 lennox . what 's your grace 's will ? 
 macbeth . saw you the weird sister ? 
 lennox . no , my lord . 
 macbeth . came they not by you ? 
 lennox . no inde , my lord . 
 macbeth . infect be the 'air whereon they ride , 
 and damn 'd all those that trust them ! i did hear 
 the gallop of hors . who wast came by ? 
 lennox . 't is two or three , my lord , that bring you word 
 macduff is fled to england . 
 macbeth . fled to england ? 
 lennox . ay , my good lord . 
 macbeth . [ asid . ] time , thou anticipatest my dread exploit . 
 the flighti purpos never is o'ertook 
 unless the deed go with it . from thi moment 
 the veri firstl of my heart shall be 
 the firstl of my hand . and even now , 
 to crown my thought with act , be it thought and done : 
 the castl of macduff i will surpris , 
 seiz upon fife , give to the edg o ' the sword 
 hi wife , hi babe , and all unfortun soul 
 that trace him in hi line . no boast like a fool ; 
 thi deed i 'll do befor thi purpos cool . 
 but no more sight ! -where are these gentlemen ? 
 come , bring me where they are . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 fife . macduff 's castl . 
 
 enter ladi macduff , her son , and ross . 
 
 ladi macduff . what had he done , to make him fli the land ? 
 ross . you must have patienc , madam . 
 ladi macduff . he had none ; 
 hi flight wa mad . when our action do not , 
 our fear do make us traitor . 
 ross . you know not 
 whether it wa hi wisdom or hi fear . 
 ladi macduff . wisdom ? to leav hi wife , to leav hi babe , 
 hi mansion , and hi titl , in a place 
 from whenc himself doe fli ? he love us not ; 
 he want the natur touch ; for the poor wren , 
 the most diminut of bird , will fight , 
 her young one in her nest , against the owl . 
 all is the fear and noth is the love ; 
 as littl is the wisdom , where the flight 
 so run against all reason . 
 ross . my dearest coz , 
 i pray you , school yourself . but for your husband , 
 he is nobl , wise , judici , and best know 
 the fit o ' the season . i dare not speak much further ; 
 but cruel are the time when we are traitor 
 and do not know ourselv ; when we hold rumor 
 from what we fear , yet know not what we fear , 
 but float upon a wild and violent sea 
 each way and move . i take my leav of you ; 
 shall not be long but i 'll be here again . 
 thing at the worst will ceas or els climb upward 
 to what they were befor . my pretti cousin , 
 bless upon you ! 
 ladi macduff . father 'd he is , and yet he 's fatherless . 
 ross . i am so much a fool , should i stay longer , 
 it would be my disgrac and your discomfort . 
 i take my leav at onc . exit . 
 ladi macduff . sirrah , your father 's dead . 
 and what will you do now ? how will you live ? 
 son . as bird do , mother . 
 ladi macduff . what , with worm and fli ? 
 son . with what i get , i mean ; and so do they . 
 ladi macduff . poor bird ! thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime , 
 the pitfal nor the gin . 
 son . whi should i , mother ? poor bird they are not set for . 
 my father is not dead , for all your say . 
 ladi macduff . ye , he is dead . how wilt thou do for father ? 
 son . nay , how will you do for a husband ? 
 ladi macduff . whi , i can buy me twenti at ani market . 
 son . then you 'll buy 'em to sell again . 
 ladi macduff . thou speak'st with all thi wit , and yet , i ' faith , 
 with wit enough for thee . 
 son . wa my father a traitor , mother ? 
 ladi macduff . ay , that he wa . 
 son . what is a traitor ? 
 ladi macduff . whi one that swear and lie . 
 son . and be all traitor that do so ? 
 ladi macduff . everyon that doe so is a traitor and must be 
 hang . 
 son . and must they all be hang that swear and lie ? 
 ladi macduff . everyon . 
 son . who must hang them ? 
 ladi macduff . whi , the honest men . 
 son . then the liar and swearer are fool , for there are liar and 
 swearer enow to beat the honest men and hang up them . 
 ladi macduff . now , god help thee , poor monkey ! but how wilt thou do 
 for a father ? 
 son . if he were dead , you'ld weep for him ; if you would not , it 
 were a good sign that i should quickli have a new father . 
 ladi macduff . poor prattler , how thou talk'st ! 
 
 enter a messeng . 
 
 messeng . bless you , fair dame ! i am not to you known , 
 though in your state of honor i am perfect . 
 i doubt some danger doe approach you nearli . 
 if you will take a home man 's advic , 
 be not found here ; henc , with your littl one . 
 to fright you thu , methink i am too savag ; 
 to do wors to you were fell cruelti , 
 which is too nigh your person . heaven preserv you ! 
 i dare abid no longer . exit . 
 ladi macduff . whither should i fli ? 
 i have done no harm . but i rememb now 
 i am in thi earthli world , where to do harm 
 is often laudabl , to do good sometim 
 account danger folli . whi then , ala , 
 do i put up that womanli defens , 
 to say i have done no harm -what are these face ? 
 
 enter murther . 
 
 first murther . where is your husband ? 
 ladi macduff . i hope , in no place so unsanctifi 
 where such as thou mayst find him . 
 first murther . he 's a traitor . 
 son . thou liest , thou shag-ear 'd villain ! 
 first murther . what , you egg ! 
 stab him . 
 young fri of treacheri ! 
 son . he ha kill 'd me , mother . 
 run away , i pray you ! die . 
 exit ladi macduff , cri `` murther ! '' 
 exeunt murther , follow her . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 england . befor the king 's palac . 
 
 enter malcolm and macduff . 
 
 malcolm . let us seek out some desol shade and there 
 weep our sad bosom empti . 
 macduff . let us rather 
 hold fast the mortal sword , and like good men 
 bestrid our downfall'n birthdom . each new morn 
 new widow howl , new orphan cri , new sorrow 
 strike heaven on the face , that it resound 
 as if it felt with scotland and yell 'd out 
 like syllabl of dolor . 
 malcolm . what i believ , i 'll wall ; 
 what know , believ ; and what i can redress , 
 as i shall find the time to friend , i will . 
 what you have spoke , it may be so perchanc . 
 thi tyrant , whose sole name blister our tongu , 
 wa onc thought honest . you have love him well ; 
 he hath not touch 'd you yet . i am young , but someth 
 you may deserv of him through me , and wisdom 
 to offer up a weak , poor , innoc lamb 
 to appeas an angri god . 
 macduff . i am not treacher . 
 malcolm . but macbeth is . 
 a good and virtuou natur may recoil 
 in an imperi charg . but i shall crave your pardon ; 
 that which you are , my thought can not transpos . 
 angel are bright still , though the brightest fell . 
 though all thing foul would wear the brow of grace , 
 yet grace must still look so . 
 macduff . i have lost my hope . 
 malcolm . perchanc even there where i did find my doubt . 
 whi in that raw left you wife and child , 
 those preciou motiv , those strong knot of love , 
 without leave-tak ? i pray you , 
 let not my jealousi be your dishonor , 
 but mine own safeti . you may be rightli just , 
 whatev i shall think . 
 macduff . bleed , bleed , poor countri ! 
 great tyranni , lay thou thi basi sure , 
 for good dare not check thee . wear thou thi wrong ; 
 the titl is affeer 'd . fare thee well , lord . 
 i would not be the villain that thou think'st 
 for the whole space that 's in the tyrant 's grasp 
 and the rich east to boot . 
 malcolm . be not offend ; 
 i speak not as in absolut fear of you . 
 i think our countri sink beneath the yoke ; 
 it weep , it bleed , and each new day a gash 
 is ad to her wound . i think withal 
 there would be hand uplift in my right ; 
 and here from graciou england have i offer 
 of goodli thousand . but for all thi , 
 when i shall tread upon the tyrant 's head , 
 or wear it on my sword , yet my poor countri 
 shall have more vice than it had befor , 
 more suffer and more sundri way than ever , 
 by him that shall succeed . 
 macduff . what should he be ? 
 malcolm . it is myself i mean , in whom i know 
 all the particular of vice so graft 
 that , when they shall be open 'd , black macbeth 
 will seem as pure as snow , and the poor state 
 esteem him as a lamb , be compar 
 with my confineless harm . 
 macduff . not in the legion 
 of horrid hell can come a devil more damn 'd 
 in evil to top macbeth . 
 malcolm . i grant him bloodi , 
 luxuri , avarici , fals , deceit , 
 sudden , malici , smack of everi sin 
 that ha a name . but there 's no bottom , none , 
 in my voluptu . your wive , your daughter , 
 your matron , and your maid could not fill up 
 the cestern of my lust , and my desir 
 all contin impedi would o'erbear 
 that did oppos my will . better macbeth 
 than such an one to reign . 
 macduff . boundless intemper 
 in natur is a tyranni ; it hath been 
 the untim empti of the happi throne , 
 and fall of mani king . but fear not yet 
 to take upon you what is your . you may 
 convey your pleasur in a spaciou plenti 
 and yet seem cold , the time you may so hoodwink . 
 we have will dame enough ; there can not be 
 that vultur in you to devour so mani 
 as will to great dedic themselv , 
 find it so inclin . 
 malcolm . with thi there grow 
 in my most ill-compos affect such 
 a stanchless avaric that , were i king , 
 i should cut off the nobl for their land , 
 desir hi jewel and thi other 's hous , 
 and my more-hav would be as a sauc 
 to make me hunger more , that i should forg 
 quarrel unjust against the good and loyal , 
 destroy them for wealth . 
 macduff . thi avaric 
 stick deeper , grow with more pernici root 
 than summer-seem lust , and it hath been 
 the sword of our slain king . yet do not fear ; 
 scotland hath foison to fill up your will 
 of your mere own . all these are portabl , 
 with other grace weigh 'd . 
 malcolm . but i have none . the king-becom grace , 
 as justic , veriti , temper , stabl , 
 bounti , persever , merci , lowli , 
 devot , patienc , courag , fortitud , 
 i have no relish of them , but abound 
 in the divis of each sever crime , 
 act it mani way . nay , had i power , i should 
 pour the sweet milk of concord into hell , 
 uproar the univers peac , confound 
 all uniti on earth . 
 macduff . o scotland , scotland ! 
 malcolm . if such a one be fit to govern , speak . 
 i am as i have spoken . 
 macduff . fit to govern ? 
 no , not to live . o nation miser ! 
 with an untitl tyrant bloody-scept 'd , 
 when shalt thou see thi wholesom day again , 
 sinc that the truest issu of thi throne 
 by hi own interdict stand accurs 
 and doe blasphem hi breed ? thi royal father 
 wa a most saint king ; the queen that bore thee , 
 often upon her knee than on her feet , 
 die everi day she live . fare thee well ! 
 these evil thou repeat'st upon thyself 
 have banish 'd me from scotland . o my breast , 
 thi hope end here ! 
 malcolm . macduff , thi nobl passion , 
 child of integr , hath from my soul 
 wipe the black scrupl , reconcil my thought 
 to thi good truth and honor . devilish macbeth 
 by mani of these train hath sought to win me 
 into hi power , and modest wisdom pluck me 
 from over-credul hast . but god abov 
 deal between thee and me ! for even now 
 i put myself to thi direct and 
 unspeak mine own detract ; here abjur 
 the taint and blame i laid upon myself , 
 for stranger to my natur . i am yet 
 unknown to woman , never wa forsworn , 
 scarc have covet what wa mine own , 
 at no time broke my faith , would not betray 
 the devil to hi fellow , and delight 
 no less in truth than life . my first fals speak 
 wa thi upon myself . what i am truli 
 is thine and my poor countri 's to command . 
 whither inde , befor thi here-approach , 
 old siward , with ten thousand warlik men 
 alreadi at a point , wa set forth . 
 now we 'll togeth , and the chanc of good 
 be like our warrant quarrel ! whi are you silent ? 
 macduff . such welcom and unwelcom thing at onc 
 't is hard to reconcil . 
 
 enter a doctor . 
 
 malcolm . well , more anon . come the king forth , i pray you ? 
 doctor . ay , sir , there are a crew of wretch soul 
 that stay hi cure . their maladi convinc 
 the great assay of art , but at hi touch , 
 such sanctiti hath heaven given hi hand , 
 they present amend . 
 malcolm . i thank you , doctor . exit doctor . 
 macduff . what 's the diseas he mean ? 
 malcolm . 't is call 'd the evil : 
 a most miracul work in thi good king , 
 which often , sinc my here-remain in england , 
 i have seen him do . how he solicit heaven , 
 himself best know ; but strangely-visit peopl , 
 all swol'n and ulcer , piti to the eye , 
 the mere despair of surgeri , he cure , 
 hang a golden stamp about their neck 
 put on with holi prayer ; and 't is spoken , 
 to the succeed royalti he leav 
 the heal benedict . with thi strang virtu 
 he hath a heavenli gift of propheci , 
 and sundri bless hang about hi throne 
 that speak him full of grace . 
 
 enter ross . 
 
 macduff . see , who come here ? 
 malcolm . my countryman , but yet i know him not . 
 macduff . my ever gentl cousin , welcom hither . 
 malcolm . i know him now . good god , betim remov 
 the mean that make us stranger ! 
 ross . sir , amen . 
 macduff . stand scotland where it did ? 
 ross . ala , poor countri , 
 almost afraid to know itself ! it can not 
 be call 'd our mother , but our grave . where noth , 
 but who know noth , is onc seen to smile ; 
 where sigh and groan and shriek that rend the air , 
 are made , not mark 'd ; where violent sorrow seem 
 a modern ecstasi . the dead man 's knell 
 is there scarc ask 'd for who , and good men 's live 
 expir befor the flower in their cap , 
 die or ere they sicken . 
 macduff . o , relat 
 too nice , and yet too true ! 
 malcolm . what 's the newest grief ? 
 ross . that of an hour 's age doth hiss the speaker ; 
 each minut teem a new one . 
 macduff . how doe my wife ? 
 ross . whi , well . 
 macduff . and all my children ? 
 ross . well too . 
 macduff . the tyrant ha not batter 'd at their peac ? 
 ross . no , they were well at peac when i did leav 'em . 
 macduff . be not a niggard of your speech . how goest ? 
 ross . when i came hither to transport the tide , 
 which i have heavili born , there ran a rumor 
 of mani worthi fellow that were out , 
 which wa to my belief wit 'd the rather , 
 for that i saw the tyrant 's power afoot . 
 now is the time of help ; your eye in scotland 
 would creat soldier , make our women fight , 
 to doff their dire distress . 
 malcolm . be't their comfort 
 we are come thither . graciou england hath 
 lent us good siward and ten thousand men ; 
 an older and a better soldier none 
 that christendom give out . 
 ross . would i could answer 
 thi comfort with the like ! but i have word 
 that would be howl 'd out in the desert air , 
 where hear should not latch them . 
 macduff . what concern they ? 
 the gener caus ? or is it a fee-grief 
 due to some singl breast ? 
 ross . no mind that 's honest 
 but in it share some woe , though the main part 
 pertain to you alon . 
 macduff . if it be mine , 
 keep it not from me , quickli let me have it . 
 ross . let not your ear despis my tongu forev , 
 which shall possess them with the heaviest sound 
 that ever yet they heard . 
 macduff . humh ! i guess at it . 
 ross . your castl is surpris ; your wife and babe 
 savag slaughter 'd . to relat the manner 
 were , on the quarri of these murther 'd deer , 
 to add the death of you . 
 malcolm . merci heaven ! 
 what , man ! neer pull your hat upon your brow ; 
 give sorrow word . the grief that doe not speak 
 whisper the o'erfraught heart , and bid it break . 
 macduff . my children too ? 
 ross . wife , children , servant , all 
 that could be found . 
 macduff . and i must be from thenc ! 
 my wife kill 'd too ? 
 ross . i have said . 
 malcolm . be comfort . 
 let 's make us medicin of our great reveng , 
 to cure thi deadli grief . 
 macduff . he ha no children . all my pretti one ? 
 did you say all ? o hell-kit ! all ? 
 what , all my pretti chicken and their dam 
 at one fell swoop ? 
 malcolm . disput it like a man . 
 macduff . i shall do so , 
 but i must also feel it as a man . 
 i can not but rememb such thing were 
 that were most preciou to me . did heaven look on , 
 and would not take their part ? sin macduff , 
 they were all struck for thee ! naught that i am , 
 not for their own demerit , but for mine , 
 fell slaughter on their soul . heaven rest them now ! 
 malcolm . be thi the whetston of your sword . let grief 
 convert to anger ; blunt not the heart , enrag it . 
 macduff . o , i could play the woman with mine eye 
 and braggart with my tongu ! but , gentl heaven , 
 cut short all intermiss ; front to front 
 bring thou thi fiend of scotland and myself ; 
 within my sword 's length set him ; if he 'scape , 
 heaven forgiv him too ! 
 malcolm . thi tune goe manli . 
 come , go we to the king ; our power is readi , 
 our lack is noth but our leav . macbeth 
 is ripe for shake , and the power abov 
 put on their instrument . receiv what cheer you may , 
 the night is long that never find the day . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 dunsinan . anteroom in the castl . 
 
 enter a doctor of physic and a wait gentlewoman . 
 
 doctor . i have two night watch with you , but can perceiv no 
 truth in your report . when wa it she last walk ? 
 gentlewoman . sinc hi majesti went into the field , have seen her 
 rise from her bed , throw her nightgown upon her , unlock her 
 closet , take forth paper , fold it , write upo n't , read it , 
 afterward seal it , and again return to bed ; yet all thi while 
 in a most fast sleep . 
 doctor . a great perturb in natur , to receiv at onc the 
 benefit of sleep and do the effect of watch ! in thi slumberi 
 agit , besid her walk and other actual perform , 
 what , at ani time , have you heard her say ? 
 gentlewoman . that , sir , which i will not report after her . 
 doctor . you may to me , and 't is most meet you should . 
 gentlewoman . neither to you nor anyon , have no wit to 
 confirm my speech . 
 
 enter ladi macbeth with a taper . 
 
 lo you , here she come ! thi is her veri guis , and , upon my 
 life , fast asleep . observ her ; stand close . 
 doctor . how came she by that light ? 
 gentlewoman . whi , it stood by her . she ha light by her 
 continu ; 't is her command . 
 doctor . you see , her eye are open . 
 gentlewoman . ay , but their sens is shut . 
 doctor . what is it she doe now ? look how she rub her hand . 
 gentlewoman . it is an accustom action with her , to seem thu 
 wash her hand . i have known her continu in thi a quarter of 
 an hour . 
 ladi macbeth . yet here 's a spot . 
 doctor . hark , she speak ! i will set down what come from her , to 
 satisfi my remembr the more strongli . 
 ladi macbeth . out , damn spot ! out , i say ! one- two -whi then 't is 
 time to do't . hell is murki . fie , my lord , fie ! a soldier , and 
 afeard ? what need we fear who know it , when none can call our 
 power to account ? yet who would have thought the old man to have 
 had so much blood in him ? 
 doctor . do you mark that ? 
 ladi macbeth . the thane of fife had a wife ; where is she now ? what , 
 will these hand neer be clean ? no more o ' that , my lord , no more 
 o ' that . you mar all with thi start . 
 doctor . go to , go to ; you have known what you should not . 
 gentlewoman . she ha spoke what she should not , i am sure of that . 
 heaven know what she ha known . 
 ladi macbeth . here 's the smell of the blood still . all the perfum 
 of arabia will not sweeten thi littl hand . oh , oh , oh ! 
 doctor . what a sigh is there ! the heart is sore charg . 
 gentlewoman . i would not have such a heart in my bosom for the 
 digniti of the whole bodi . 
 doctor . well , well , well- 
 gentlewoman . pray god it be , sir . 
 doctor . thi diseas is beyond my practic . yet i have known those 
 which have walk in their sleep who have die holili in their 
 bed . 
 ladi macbeth . wash your hand , put on your nightgown , look not so 
 pale . i tell you yet again , banquo 's buri ; he can not come out 
 on 's grave . 
 doctor . even so ? 
 ladi macbeth . to bed , to bed ; there 's knock at the gate . come , 
 come , come , come , give me your hand.what 's done can not be undon . 
 to bed , to bed , to bed . 
 exit . 
 doctor . will she go now to bed ? 
 gentlewoman . directli . 
 doctor . foul whisper are abroad . unnatur deed 
 do breed unnatur troubl ; infect mind 
 to their deaf pillow will discharg their secret . 
 more need she the divin than the physician . 
 god , god , forgiv us all ! look after her ; 
 remov from her the mean of all annoy , 
 and still keep eye upon her . so good night . 
 my mind she ha mate and amaz my sight . 
 i think , but dare not speak . 
 gentlewoman . good night , good doctor . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the countri near dunsinan . drum and color . 
 
 enter menteith , caith , angu , lennox , and soldier . 
 
 menteith . the english power is near , led on by malcolm , 
 hi uncl siward , and the good macduff . 
 reveng burn in them , for their dear caus 
 would to the bleed and the grim alarm 
 excit the mortifi man . 
 angu . near birnam wood 
 shall we well meet them ; that way are they come . 
 caith . who know if donalbain be with hi brother ? 
 lennox . for certain , sir , he is not ; i have a file 
 of all the gentri . there is seward 's son 
 and mani unrough youth that even now 
 protest their first of manhood . 
 menteith . what doe the tyrant ? 
 caith . great dunsinan he strongli fortifi . 
 some say he 's mad ; other , that lesser hate him , 
 do call it valiant furi ; but , for certain , 
 he can not buckl hi distemp 'd caus 
 within the belt of rule . 
 angu . now doe he feel 
 hi secret murther stick on hi hand , 
 now minut revolt upbraid hi faith-breach ; 
 those he command move onli in command , 
 noth in love . now doe he feel hi titl 
 hang loos about him , like a giant 's robe 
 upon a dwarfish thief . 
 menteith . who then shall blame 
 hi pester 'd sens to recoil and start , 
 when all that is within him doe condemn 
 itself for be there ? 
 caith . well , march we on 
 to give obedi where 't is truli owe . 
 meet we the medicin of the sickli weal , 
 and with him pour we , in our countri 's purg , 
 each drop of us . 
 lennox . or so much as it need 
 to dew the sovereign flower and drown the weed . 
 make we our march toward birnam . exeunt march . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 dunsinan . a room in the castl . 
 
 enter macbeth , doctor , and attend . 
 
 macbeth . bring me no more report ; let them fli all ! 
 till birnam wood remov to dunsinan 
 i can not taint with fear . what 's the boy malcolm ? 
 wa he not born of woman ? the spirit that know 
 all mortal consequ have pronounc me thu : 
 `` fear not , macbeth ; no man that 's born of woman 
 shall e'er have power upon thee . '' then fli , fals thane , 
 and mingl with the english epicur ! 
 the mind i sway by and the heart i bear 
 shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear . 
 
 enter a servant . 
 
 the devil damn thee black , thou cream-fac loon ! 
 where got'st thou that goos look ? 
 servant . there is ten thousand- 
 macbeth . gees , villain ? 
 servant . soldier , sir . 
 macbeth . go prick thi face and over-r thi fear , 
 thou lily-liv 'd boy . what soldier , patch ? 
 death of thi soul ! those linen cheek of thine 
 are counselor to fear . what soldier , whey-fac ? 
 servant . the english forc , so pleas you . 
 macbeth . take thi face henc . exit servant . 
 seyton-i am sick at heart , 
 when i behold- seyton , i say ! - thi push 
 will cheer me ever or disseat me now . 
 i have live long enough . my way of life 
 is fall'n into the sear , the yellow leaf , 
 and that which should accompani old age , 
 as honor , love , obedi , troop of friend , 
 i must not look to have ; but in their stead , 
 curs , not loud but deep , mouth-honor , breath , 
 which the poor heart would fain deni and dare not . 
 seyton ! 
 
 enter seyton . 
 
 seyton . what 's your graciou pleasur ? 
 macbeth . what news more ? 
 seyton . all is confirm 'd , my lord , which wa report . 
 macbeth . i 'll fight , 'til from my bone my flesh be hack 'd . 
 give me my armor . 
 seyton . 't is not need yet . 
 macbeth . i 'll put it on . 
 send out more hors , skirr the countri round , 
 hang those that talk of fear . give me mine armor . 
 how doe your patient , doctor ? 
 doctor . not so sick , my lord , 
 as she is troubl with thick-com fanci , 
 that keep her from her rest . 
 macbeth . cure her of that . 
 canst thou not minist to a mind diseas , 
 pluck from the memori a root sorrow , 
 raze out the written troubl of the brain , 
 and with some sweet oblivi antidot 
 cleans the stuff 'd bosom of that peril stuff 
 which weigh upon the heart ? 
 doctor . therein the patient 
 must minist to himself . 
 macbeth . throw physic to the dog , i 'll none of it . 
 come , put mine armor on ; give me my staff . 
 seyton , send out . doctor , the thane fli from me . 
 come , sir , dispatch . if thou couldst , doctor , cast 
 the water of my land , find her diseas 
 and purg it to a sound and pristin health , 
 i would applaud thee to the veri echo , 
 that should applaud again . pull't off , i say . 
 what rhubarb , cyme , or what purg drug 
 would scour these english henc ? hearst thou of them ? 
 doctor . ay , my good lord , your royal prepar 
 make us hear someth . 
 macbeth . bring it after me . 
 i will not be afraid of death and bane 
 till birnam forest come to dunsinan . 
 doctor . [ asid . ] were i from dunsinan away and clear , 
 profit again should hardli draw me here . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 countri near birnam wood . drum and color . 
 
 enter malcolm , old seward and hi son , macduff , menteith , caith , 
 angu , lennox , ross , and soldier , march . 
 
 malcolm . cousin , i hope the day are near at hand 
 that chamber will be safe . 
 menteith . we doubt it noth . 
 siward . what wood is thi befor us ? 
 menteith . the wood of birnam . 
 malcolm . let everi soldier hew him down a bough , 
 and bear't befor him ; therebi shall we shadow 
 the number of our host , and make discoveri 
 err in report of us . 
 soldier . it shall be done . 
 siward . we learn no other but the confid tyrant 
 keep still in dunsinan and will endur 
 our set down before't . 
 malcolm . 't is hi main hope ; 
 for where there is advantag to be given , 
 both more and less have given him the revolt , 
 and none serv with him but constrain thing 
 whose heart are absent too . 
 macduff . let our just censur 
 attend the true event , and put we on 
 industri soldiership . 
 siward . the time approach 
 that will with due decis make us know 
 what we shall say we have and what we owe . 
 thought specul their unsur hope relat , 
 but certain issu stroke must arbitr . 
 toward which advanc the war . 
 exeunt march . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 dunsinan . within the castl . 
 
 enter macbeth , seyton , and soldier , with drum and color . 
 
 macbeth . hang out our banner on the outward wall ; 
 the cri is still , `` they come ! '' our castl 's strength 
 will laugh a sieg to scorn . here let them lie 
 till famin and the agu eat them up . 
 were they not forc with those that should be our , 
 we might have met them dare , beard to beard , 
 and beat them backward home . 
 a cri of women within . 
 what is that nois ? 
 seyton . it is the cri of women , my good lord . exit . 
 macbeth . i have almost forgot the tast of fear : 
 the time ha been , my sens would have cool 'd 
 to hear a night-shriek , and my fell of hair 
 would at a dismal treatis rous and stir 
 as life were i n't . i have supp 'd full with horror ; 
 dire , familiar to my slaughter thought , 
 can not onc start me . 
 
 re-ent seyton . 
 wherefor wa that cri ? 
 seyton . the queen , my lord , is dead . 
 macbeth . she should have die hereaft ; 
 there would have been a time for such a word . 
 tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow 
 creep in thi petti pace from day to day 
 to the last syllabl of record time ; 
 and all our yesterday have light fool 
 the way to dusti death . out , out , brief candl ! 
 life 's but a walk shadow , a poor player 
 that strut and fret hi hour upon the stage 
 and then is heard no more . it is a tale 
 told by an idiot , full of sound and furi , 
 signifi noth . 
 
 enter a messeng . 
 
 thou comest to use thi tongu ; thi stori quickli . 
 messeng . graciou my lord , 
 i should report that which i say i saw , 
 but know not how to do it . 
 macbeth . well , say , sir . 
 messeng . as i did stand my watch upon the hill , 
 i look 'd toward birnam , and anon , methought , 
 the wood began to move . 
 macbeth . liar and slave ! 
 messeng . let me endur your wrath , if't be not so . 
 within thi three mile may you see it come ; 
 i say , a move grove . 
 macbeth . if thou speak'st fals , 
 upon the next tree shalt thou hang aliv , 
 till famin cling thee ; if thi speech be sooth , 
 i care not if thou dost for me as much . 
 i pull in resolut and begin 
 to doubt the equivoc of the fiend 
 that lie like truth . `` fear not , till birnam wood 
 do come to dunsinan , '' and now a wood 
 come toward dunsinan . arm , arm , and out ! 
 if thi which he avouch doe appear , 
 there is nor fli henc nor tarri here . 
 i 'gin to be aweari of the sun 
 and wish the estat o ' the world were now undon . 
 ring the alarum bell ! blow , wind ! come , wrack ! 
 at least we 'll die with har on our back . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 dunsinan . befor the castl . 
 
 enter malcolm , old siward , macduff , and their armi , with bough . 
 drum and color . 
 
 malcolm . now near enough ; your leavi screen throw down , 
 and show like those you are . you , worthi uncl , 
 shall with my cousin , your right nobl son , 
 lead our first battl . worthi macduff and we 
 shall take upon 's what els remain to do , 
 accord to our order . 
 siward . fare you well . 
 do we but find the tyrant 's power tonight , 
 let us be beaten if we can not fight . 
 macduff . make all our trumpet speak , give them all breath , 
 those clamor harbing of blood and death . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 dunsinan . befor the castl . alarum . 
 
 enter macbeth . 
 
 macbeth . they have tie me to a stake ; i can not fli , 
 but bear-lik i must fight the cours . what 's he 
 that wa not born of woman ? such a one 
 am i to fear , or none . 
 
 enter young siward . 
 
 young siward . what is thi name ? 
 macbeth . thou'lt be afraid to hear it . 
 young siward . no , though thou call'st thyself a hotter name 
 than ani is in hell . 
 macbeth . my name 's macbeth . 
 young siward . the devil himself could not pronounc a titl 
 more hate to mine ear . 
 macbeth . no , nor more fear . 
 young siward o thou liest , abhor tyrant ; with my sword 
 i 'll prove the lie thou speak'st . 
 they fight , and young seward is slain . 
 macbeth . thou wast born of woman . 
 but sword i smile at , weapon laugh to scorn , 
 brandish 'd by man that 's of a woman born . exit . 
 
 alarum . enter macduff . 
 
 macduff . that way the nois is . tyrant , show thi face ! 
 if thou best slain and with no stroke of mine , 
 my wife and children 's ghost will haunt me still . 
 i can not strike at wretch kern , whose arm 
 are hire to bear their stave . either thou , macbeth , 
 or els my sword , with an unbatt 'd edg , 
 i sheath again undeed . there thou shouldst be ; 
 by thi great clatter , one of greatest note 
 seem bruit . let me find him , fortun ! 
 and more i beg not . exit . alarum . 
 
 enter malcolm and old siward . 
 
 siward . thi way , my lord ; the castl 's gentli render 'd . 
 the tyrant 's peopl on both side do fight , 
 the nobl thane do brave in the war , 
 the day almost itself profess your , 
 and littl is to do . 
 malcolm . we have met with foe 
 that strike besid us . 
 siward . enter , sir , the castl . 
 exeunt . alarum . 
 
 
 
 
 scene viii . 
 anoth part of the field . 
 
 enter macbeth . 
 
 macbeth . whi should i play the roman fool and die 
 on mine own sword ? while i see live , the gash 
 do better upon them . 
 
 enter macduff . 
 
 macduff . turn , hell hound , turn ! 
 macbeth . of all men els i have avoid thee . 
 but get thee back , my soul is too much charg 
 with blood of thine alreadi . 
 macduff . i have no word . 
 my voic is in my sword , thou bloodier villain 
 than term can give thee out ! they fight . 
 macbeth . thou losest labor . 
 as easi mayst thou the intrench air 
 with thi keen sword impress as make me bleed . 
 let fall thi blade on vulner crest ; 
 i bear a charm life , which must not yield 
 to one of woman born . 
 macduff . despair thi charm , 
 and let the angel whom thou still hast serv 
 tell thee , macduff wa from hi mother 's womb 
 untim ripp 'd . 
 macbeth . accurs be that tongu that tell me so , 
 for it hath cow 'd my better part of man ! 
 and be these juggl fiend no more believ 
 that patter with us in a doubl sens , 
 that keep the word of promis to our ear 
 and break it to our hope . i 'll not fight with thee . 
 macduff . then yield thee , coward , 
 and live to be the show and gaze o ' the time . 
 we 'll have thee , as our rarer monster are , 
 paint upon a pole , and underwrit , 
 `` here may you see the tyrant . '' 
 macbeth . i will not yield , 
 to kiss the ground befor young malcolm 's feet , 
 and to be bait with the rabbl 's curs . 
 though birnam wood be come to dunsinan , 
 and thou oppos , be of no woman born , 
 yet i will tri the last . befor my bodi 
 i throw my warlik shield ! lay on , macduff , 
 and damn 'd be him that first cri , `` hold , enough ! '' 
 exeunt fight . alarum . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ix . 
 
 retreat . flourish . enter , with drum and color , malcolm , old siward , ross , 
 the other thane , and soldier . 
 
 malcolm . i would the friend we miss were safe arriv . 
 siward . some must go off , and yet , by these i see , 
 so great a day as thi is cheapli bought . 
 malcolm . macduff is miss , and your nobl son . 
 ross . your son , my lord , ha paid a soldier 's debt . 
 he onli live but till he wa a man , 
 the which no sooner had hi prowess confirm 'd 
 in the unshrink station where he fought , 
 but like a man he die . 
 siward . then he is dead ? 
 ross . ay , and brought off the field . your caus of sorrow 
 must not be measur by hi worth , for then 
 it hath no end . 
 siward . had he hi hurt befor ? 
 ross . ay , on the front . 
 siward . whi then , god 's soldier be he ! 
 had i as mani son as i have hair , 
 i would not wish them to a fairer death . 
 and so hi knell is knoll 'd . 
 malcolm . he 's worth more sorrow , 
 and that i 'll spend for him . 
 siward . he 's worth no more : 
 they say he part well and paid hi score , 
 and so god be with him ! here come newer comfort . 
 
 re-ent macduff , with macbeth 's head . 
 
 macduff . hail , king , for so thou art . behold where stand 
 the usurp 's curs head . the time is free . 
 i see thee compass 'd with thi kingdom 's pearl 
 that speak my salut in their mind , 
 whose voic i desir aloud with mine- 
 hail , king of scotland ! 
 all . hail , king of scotland ! flourish . 
 malcolm . we shall not spend a larg expens of time 
 befor we reckon with your sever love 
 and make us even with you . my thane and kinsmen , 
 henceforth be earl , the first that ever scotland 
 in such an honor name . what 's more to do , 
 which would be plant newli with the time , 
 as call home our exil friend abroad 
 that fled the snare of watch tyranni , 
 produc forth the cruel minist 
 of thi dead butcher and hi fiend-lik queen , 
 who , as 't is thought , by self and violent hand 
 took off her life ; thi , and what need els 
 that call upon us , by the grace of grace 
 we will perform in measur , time , and place . 
 so thank to all at onc and to each one , 
 whom we invit to see us crown 'd at scone . 
 flourish . exeunt . 
 -the end- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 measur for measur 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 vincentio , the duke 
 angelo , the deputi 
 escalu , an ancient lord 
 claudio , a young gentleman 
 lucio , a fantast 
 two other like gentlemen 
 varriu , a gentleman , servant to the duke 
 provost 
 thoma , friar 
 peter , friar 
 a justic 
 elbow , a simpl constabl 
 froth , a foolish gentleman 
 pompey , a clown and servant to mistress overdon 
 abhorson , an execution 
 barnardin , a dissolut prison 
 
 isabella , sister to claudio 
 mariana , betroth to angelo 
 juliet , belov of claudio 
 francisca , a nun 
 mistress overdon , a bawd 
 
 lord , offic , citizen , boy , and attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 vienna 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 the duke 's palac 
 
 enter duke , escalu , lord , and attend 
 
 duke . escalu ! 
 escalu . my lord . 
 duke . of govern the properti to unfold 
 would seem in me t ' affect speech and discours , 
 sinc i am put to know that your own scienc 
 exce , in that , the list of all advic 
 my strength can give you ; then no more remain 
 but that to your sufficiency- as your worth is able- 
 and let them work . the natur of our peopl , 
 our citi 's institut , and the term 
 for common justic , y'are as pregnant in 
 as art and practic hath enrich ani 
 that we rememb . there is our commiss , 
 from which we would not have you warp . call hither , 
 i say , bid come befor us , angelo . exit an attend 
 what figur of us think you he will bear ? 
 for you must know we have with special soul 
 elect him our absenc to suppli ; 
 lent him our terror , dress 'd him with our love , 
 and given hi deput all the organ 
 of our own power . what think you of it ? 
 escalu . if ani in vienna be of worth 
 to undergo such ampl grace and honour , 
 it is lord angelo . 
 
 enter angelo 
 
 duke . look where he come . 
 angelo . alway obedi to your grace 's will , 
 i come to know your pleasur . 
 duke . angelo , 
 there is a kind of charact in thi life 
 that to th ' observ doth thi histori 
 fulli unfold . thyself and thi belong 
 are not thine own so proper as to wast 
 thyself upon thi virtu , they on thee . 
 heaven doth with us as we with torch do , 
 not light them for themselv ; for if our virtu 
 did not go forth of us , 'twere all alik 
 as if we had them not . spirit are not fine touch 'd 
 but to fine issu ; nor natur never lend 
 the smallest scrupl of her excel 
 but , like a thrifti goddess , she determin 
 herself the glori of a creditor , 
 both thank and use . but i do bend my speech 
 to one that can my part in him advertis . 
 hold , therefor , angelo- 
 in our remov be thou at full ourself ; 
 mortal and merci in vienna 
 live in thi tongu and heart . old escalu , 
 though first in question , is thi secondari . 
 take thi commiss . 
 angelo . now , good my lord , 
 let there be some more test made of my metal , 
 befor so nobl and so great a figur 
 be stamp 'd upon it . 
 duke . no more evas ! 
 we have with a leaven 'd and prepar choic 
 proceed to you ; therefor take your honour . 
 our hast from henc is of so quick condit 
 that it prefer itself , and leav unquest 'd 
 matter of need valu . we shall write to you , 
 as time and our concern shall importun , 
 how it goe with us , and do look to know 
 what doth befal you here . so , fare you well . 
 to th ' hope execut do i leav you 
 of your commiss . 
 angelo . yet give leav , my lord , 
 that we may bring you someth on the way . 
 duke . my hast may not admit it ; 
 nor need you , on mine honour , have to do 
 with ani scrupl : your scope is as mine own , 
 so to enforc or qualifi the law 
 as to your soul seem good . give me your hand ; 
 i 'll privili away . i love the peopl , 
 but do not like to stage me to their eye ; 
 though it do well , i do not relish well 
 their loud applaus and ave vehement ; 
 nor do i think the man of safe discret 
 that doe affect it . onc more , fare you well . 
 angelo . the heaven give safeti to your purpos ! 
 escalu . lead forth and bring you back in happi ! 
 duke . i thank you . fare you well . exit 
 escalu . i shall desir you , sir , to give me leav 
 to have free speech with you ; and it concern me 
 to look into the bottom of my place : 
 a pow ' r i have , but of what strength and natur 
 i am not yet instruct . 
 angelo . 't is so with me . let us withdraw togeth , 
 and we may soon our satisfact have 
 touch that point . 
 escalu . i 'll wait upon your honour . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a street 
 
 enter lucio and two other gentlemen 
 
 lucio . if the duke , with the other duke , come not to composit 
 with the king of hungari , whi then all the duke fall upon the 
 king . 
 first gentleman . heaven grant us it peac , but not the king of 
 hungari 's ! 
 second gentleman . amen . 
 lucio . thou conclud'st like the sanctimoni pirat that went to 
 sea with the ten command , but scrap 'd one out of the tabl . 
 second gentleman . 'thou shalt not steal ' ? 
 lucio . ay , that he raz 'd . 
 first gentleman . whi , 't wa a command to command the captain 
 and all the rest from their function : they put forth to steal . 
 there 's not a soldier of us all that , in the thanksgiv befor 
 meat , do relish the petit well that pray for peac . 
 second gentleman . i never heard ani soldier dislik it . 
 lucio . i believ thee ; for i think thou never wast where grace wa 
 said . 
 second gentleman . no ? a dozen time at least . 
 first gentleman . what , in metr ? 
 lucio . in ani proport or in ani languag . 
 first gentleman . i think , or in ani religion . 
 lucio . ay , whi not ? grace is grace , despit of all controversi ; as , 
 for exampl , thou thyself art a wick villain , despit of all 
 grace . 
 first gentleman . well , there went but a pair of shear between us . 
 lucio . i grant ; as there may between the list and the velvet . 
 thou art the list . 
 first gentleman . and thou the velvet ; thou art good velvet ; thou'rt 
 a three-pil 'd piec , i warrant thee . i had as lief be a list of 
 an english kersey as be pil 'd , as thou art pil 'd , for a french 
 velvet . do i speak feelingli now ? 
 lucio . i think thou dost ; and , inde , with most pain feel of 
 thi speech . i will , out of thine own confess , learn to begin 
 thi health ; but , whilst i live , forget to drink after thee . 
 first gentleman . i think i have done myself wrong , have i not ? 
 second gentleman . ye , that thou hast , whether thou art taint or 
 free . 
 
 enter mistress overdon 
 
 lucio . behold , behold , where madam mitig come ! i have 
 purcha 'd as mani diseas under her roof as come to- 
 second gentleman . to what , i pray ? 
 first gentleman . judg . 
 second gentleman . to three thousand dolour a year . 
 first gentleman . ay , and more . 
 lucio . a french crown more . 
 first gentleman . thou art alway figur diseas in me , but thou 
 art full of error ; i am sound . 
 lucio . nay , not , as one would say , healthi ; but so sound as thing 
 that are hollow : thi bone are hollow ; impieti ha made a feast 
 of thee . 
 first gentleman . how now ! which of your hip ha the most profound 
 sciatica ? 
 mrs. overdon . well , well ! there 's one yonder arrest and carri 
 to prison wa worth five thousand of you all . 
 first gentleman . who 's that , i pray thee ? 
 mrs. overdon . marri , sir , that 's claudio , signior claudio . 
 first gentleman . claudio to prison ? 't is not so . 
 mrs. overdon . nay , but i know 't is so : i saw him arrest ; saw him 
 carri away ; and , which is more , within these three day hi 
 head to be chopp 'd off . 
 lucio . but , after all thi fool , i would not have it so . art 
 thou sure of thi ? 
 mrs. overdon . i am too sure of it ; and it is for get madam 
 julietta with child . 
 lucio . believ me , thi may be ; he promi 'd to meet me two hour 
 sinc , and he wa ever precis in promise-keep . 
 second gentleman . besid , you know , it draw someth near to the 
 speech we had to such a purpos . 
 first gentleman . but most of all agre with the proclam . 
 lucio . away ; let 's go learn the truth of it . 
 exeunt lucio and gentlemen 
 mrs. overdon . thu , what with the war , what with the sweat , what 
 with the gallow , and what with poverti , i am custom-shrunk . 
 
 enter pompey 
 
 how now ! what 's the news with you ? 
 pompey . yonder man is carri to prison . 
 mrs. overdon . well , what ha he done ? 
 pompey . a woman . 
 mrs. overdon . but what 's hi offenc ? 
 pompey . grope for trout in a peculiar river . 
 mrs. overdon . what ! is there a maid with child by him ? 
 pompey . no ; but there 's a woman with maid by him . you have not 
 heard of the proclam , have you ? 
 mrs. overdon . what proclam , man ? 
 pompey . all hous in the suburb of vienna must be pluck 'd down . 
 mrs. overdon . and what shall becom of those in the citi ? 
 pompey . they shall stand for seed ; they had gone down too , but that 
 a wise burgher put in for them . 
 mrs. overdon . but shall all our hous of resort in the suburb be 
 pull 'd down ? 
 pompey . to the ground , mistress . 
 mrs. overdon . whi , here 's a chang inde in the commonwealth ! 
 what shall becom of me ? 
 pompey . come , fear not you : good counsellor lack no client . 
 though you chang your place you need not chang your trade ; i 'll 
 be your tapster still . courag , there will be piti taken on you ; 
 you that have worn your eye almost out in the servic , you will 
 be consid . 
 mrs. overdon . what 's to do here , thoma tapster ? let 's withdraw . 
 pompey . here come signior claudio , led by the provost to prison ; 
 and there 's madam juliet . exeunt 
 
 enter provost , claudio , juliet , and offic ; 
 lucio follow 
 
 claudio . fellow , whi dost thou show me thu to th ' world ? 
 bear me to prison , where i am commit . 
 provost . i do it not in evil disposit , 
 but from lord angelo by special charg . 
 claudio . thu can the demigod author 
 make us pay down for our offenc by weight 
 the word of heaven : on whom it will , it will ; 
 on whom it will not , so ; yet still 't is just . 
 lucio . whi , how now , claudio , whenc come thi restraint ? 
 claudio . from too much liberti , my lucio , liberti ; 
 as surfeit is the father of much fast , 
 so everi scope by the immoder use 
 turn to restraint . our natur do pursu , 
 like rat that ravin down their proper bane , 
 a thirsti evil ; and when we drink we die . 
 lucio . if i could speak so wise under an arrest , i would send for 
 certain of my creditor ; and yet , to say the truth , i had as lief 
 have the fopperi of freedom as the moral of imprison . 
 what 's thi offenc , claudio ? 
 claudio . what but to speak of would offend again . 
 lucio . what , is't murder ? 
 claudio . no . 
 lucio . lecheri ? 
 claudio . call it so . 
 provost . away , sir ; you must go . 
 claudio . one word , good friend . lucio , a word with you . 
 lucio . a hundr , if they 'll do you ani good . is lecheri so look 'd 
 after ? 
 claudio . thu stand it with me : upon a true contract 
 i got possess of julietta 's bed . 
 you know the ladi ; she is fast my wife , 
 save that we do the denunci lack 
 of outward order ; thi we came not to , 
 onli for propag of a dow ' r 
 remain in the coffer of her friend . 
 from whom we thought it meet to hide our love 
 till time had made them for us . but it chanc 
 the stealth of our most mutual entertain , 
 with charact too gross , is writ on juliet . 
 lucio . with child , perhap ? 
 claudio . unhappili , even so . 
 and the new deputi now for the duke- 
 whether it be the fault and glimps of new , 
 or whether that the bodi public be 
 a hors whereon the governor doth ride , 
 who , newli in the seat , that it may know 
 he can command , let it straight feel the spur ; 
 whether the tyranni be in hi place , 
 or in hi emin that fill it up , 
 i stagger in . but thi new governor 
 awak me all the enrol penalti 
 which have , like unscour 'd armour , hung by th ' wall 
 so long that nineteen zodiac have gone round 
 and none of them been worn ; and , for a name , 
 now put the drowsi and neglect act 
 freshli on me . 't is sure for a name . 
 lucio . i warrant it is ; and thi head stand so tickl on thi 
 shoulder that a milkmaid , if she be in love , may sigh it off . 
 send after the duke , and appeal to him . 
 claudio . i have done so , but he 's not to be found . 
 i prithe , lucio , do me thi kind servic : 
 thi day my sister should the cloister enter , 
 and there receiv her approb ; 
 acquaint her with the danger of my state ; 
 implor her , in my voic , that she make friend 
 to the strict deputi ; bid herself assay him . 
 i have great hope in that ; for in her youth 
 there is a prone and speechless dialect 
 such as move men ; besid , she hath prosper art 
 when she will play with reason and discours , 
 and well she can persuad . 
 lucio . i pray she may ; as well for the encourag of the like , 
 which els would stand under grievou imposit , as for the 
 enjoy of thi life , who i would be sorri should be thu 
 foolishli lost at a game of tick-tack . i 'll to her . 
 claudio . i thank you , good friend lucio . 
 lucio . within two hour . 
 claudio . come , offic , away . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a monasteri 
 
 enter duke and friar thoma 
 
 duke . no , holi father ; throw away that thought ; 
 believ not that the dribbl dart of love 
 can pierc a complet bosom . whi i desir thee 
 to give me secret harbour hath a purpos 
 more grave and wrinkl than the aim and end 
 of burn youth . 
 friar . may your grace speak of it ? 
 duke . my holi sir , none better know than you 
 how i have ever lov 'd the life remov , 
 and held in idl price to haunt assembl 
 where youth , and cost , a witless braveri keep . 
 i have deliv 'd to lord angelo , 
 a man of strictur and firm abstin , 
 my absolut power and place here in vienna , 
 and he suppos me travel 'd to poland ; 
 for so i have strew 'd it in the common ear , 
 and so it is receiv . now , piou sir , 
 you will demand of me whi i do thi . 
 friar . gladli , my lord . 
 duke . we have strict statut and most bite law , 
 the need bit and curb to headstrong steed , 
 which for thi fourteen year we have let slip ; 
 even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave , 
 that goe not out to prey . now , as fond father , 
 have bound up the threat'n twig of birch , 
 onli to stick it in their children 's sight 
 for terror , not to use , in time the rod 
 becom more mock 'd than fear 'd ; so our decre , 
 dead to inflict , to themselv are dead ; 
 and liberti pluck justic by the nose ; 
 the babi beat the nurs , and quit athwart 
 goe all decorum . 
 friar . it rest in your grace 
 to unloos thi tied-up justic when you plea 'd ; 
 and it in you more dread would have seem 'd 
 than in lord angelo . 
 duke . i do fear , too dread . 
 sith 't wa my fault to give the peopl scope , 
 'twould be my tyranni to strike and gall them 
 for what i bid them do ; for we bid thi be done , 
 when evil deed have their permiss pass 
 and not the punish . therefor , inde , my father , 
 i have on angelo impo 'd the offic ; 
 who may , in th ' ambush of my name , strike home , 
 and yet my natur never in the fight 
 to do in slander . and to behold hi sway , 
 i will , as 'twere a brother of your order , 
 visit both princ and peopl . therefor , i prithe , 
 suppli me with the habit , and instruct me 
 how i may formal in person bear me 
 like a true friar . moe reason for thi action 
 at our more leisur shall i render you . 
 onli , thi one : lord angelo is precis ; 
 stand at a guard with envi ; scarc confess 
 that hi blood flow , or that hi appetit 
 is more to bread than stone . henc shall we see , 
 if power chang purpos , what our seemer be . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 a nunneri 
 
 enter isabella and francisca 
 
 isabella . and have you nun no farther privileg ? 
 francisca . are not these larg enough ? 
 isabella . ye , truli ; i speak not as desir more , 
 but rather wish a more strict restraint 
 upon the sisterhood , the votarist of saint clare . 
 lucio . [ within ] ho ! peac be in thi place ! 
 isabella . who 's that which call ? 
 francisca . it is a man 's voic . gentl isabella , 
 turn you the key , and know hi busi of him : 
 you may , i may not ; you are yet unsworn ; 
 when you have vow 'd , you must not speak with men 
 but in the presenc of the prioress ; 
 then , if you speak , you must not show your face , 
 or , if you show your face , you must not speak . 
 he call again ; i pray you answer him . exit francisca 
 isabella . peac and prosper ! who is't that call ? 
 
 enter lucio 
 
 lucio . hail , virgin , if you be , as those cheek-ros 
 proclaim you are no less . can you so stead me 
 as bring me to the sight of isabella , 
 a novic of thi place , and the fair sister 
 to her unhappi brother claudio ? 
 isabella . whi her 'unhappi brother ' ? let me ask 
 the rather , for i now must make you know 
 i am that isabella , and hi sister . 
 lucio . gentl and fair , your brother kindli greet you . 
 not to be weari with you , he 's in prison . 
 isabella . woe me ! for what ? 
 lucio . for that which , if myself might be hi judg , 
 he should receiv hi punish in thank : 
 he hath got hi friend with child . 
 isabella . sir , make me not your stori . 
 lucio . it is true . 
 i would not- though 't is my familiar sin 
 with maid to seem the lapw , and to jest , 
 tongu far from heart- play with all virgin so : 
 i hold you as a thing enski and saint , 
 by your renounc an immort spirit , 
 and to be talk 'd with in sincer , 
 as with a saint . 
 isabella . you do blasphem the good in mock me . 
 lucio . do not believ it . few and truth , 't is thu : 
 your brother and hi lover have embrac 'd . 
 as those that feed grow full , as blossom time 
 that from the seed the bare fallow bring 
 to teem foison , even so her plenteou womb 
 expresseth hi full tilth and husbandri . 
 isabella . some one with child by him ? my cousin juliet ? 
 lucio . is she your cousin ? 
 isabella . adoptedli , as school-maid chang their name 
 by vain though apt affect . 
 lucio . she it is . 
 isabella . o , let him marri her ! 
 lucio . thi is the point . 
 the duke is veri strang gone from henc ; 
 bore mani gentlemen , myself be one , 
 in hand , and hope of action ; but we do learn , 
 by those that know the veri nerv of state , 
 hi givings-out were of an infinit distanc 
 from hi true-meant design . upon hi place , 
 and with full line of hi author , 
 govern lord angelo , a man whose blood 
 is veri snow-broth , one who never feel 
 the wanton sting and motion of the sens , 
 but doth rebat and blunt hi natur edg 
 with profit of the mind , studi and fast . 
 he- to give fear to use and liberti , 
 which have for long run by the hideou law , 
 as mice by lions- hath pick 'd out an act 
 under whose heavi sens your brother 's life 
 fall into forfeit ; he arrest him on it , 
 and follow close the rigour of the statut 
 to make him an exampl . all hope is gone , 
 unless you have the grace by your fair prayer 
 to soften angelo . and that 's my pith of busi 
 'twixt you and your poor brother . 
 isabella . doth he so seek hi life ? 
 lucio . ha censur 'd him 
 alreadi , and , as i hear , the provost hath 
 a warrant for hi execut . 
 isabella . ala ! what poor abil 's in me 
 to do him good ? 
 lucio . assay the pow ' r you have . 
 isabella . my power , ala , i doubt ! 
 lucio . our doubt are traitor , 
 and make us lose the good we oft might win 
 by fear to attempt . go to lord angelo , 
 and let him learn to know , when maiden sue , 
 men give like god ; but when they weep and kneel , 
 all their petit are as freeli their 
 as they themselv would owe them . 
 isabella . i 'll see what i can do . 
 lucio . but speedili . 
 isabella . i will about it straight ; 
 no longer stay but to give the mother 
 notic of my affair . i humbl thank you . 
 commend me to my brother ; soon at night 
 i 'll send him certain word of my success . 
 lucio . i take my leav of you . 
 isabella . good sir , adieu . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 a hall in angelo 's hous 
 
 enter angelo , escalu , a justic , provost , offic , and other attend 
 
 angelo . we must not make a scarecrow of the law , 
 set it up to fear the bird of prey , 
 and let it keep one shape till custom make it 
 their perch , and not their terror . 
 escalu . ay , but yet 
 let us be keen , and rather cut a littl 
 than fall and bruis to death . ala ! thi gentleman , 
 whom i would save , had a most nobl father . 
 let but your honour know , 
 whom i believ to be most strait in virtu , 
 that , in the work of your own affect , 
 had time coher 'd with place , or place with wish , 
 or that the resolut act of our blood 
 could have attain 'd th ' effect of your own purpos 
 whether you had not sometim in your life 
 err 'd in thi point which now you censur him , 
 and pull 'd the law upon you . 
 angelo . 't is one thing to be tempt , escalu , 
 anoth thing to fall . i not deni 
 the juri , pass on the prison 's life , 
 may in the sworn twelv have a thief or two 
 guiltier than him they tri . what 's open made to justic , 
 that justic seiz . what know the law 
 that thiev do pass on thiev ? 't is veri pregnant , 
 the jewel that we find , we stoop and take't , 
 becaus we see it ; but what we do not see 
 we tread upon , and never think of it . 
 you may not so extenu hi offenc 
 for i have had such fault ; but rather tell me , 
 when i , that censur him , do so offend , 
 let mine own judgment pattern out my death , 
 and noth come in partial . sir , he must die . 
 escalu . be it as your wisdom will . 
 angelo . where is the provost ? 
 provost . here , if it like your honour . 
 angelo . see that claudio 
 be execut by nine to-morrow morn ; 
 bring him hi confessor ; let him be prepar 'd ; 
 for that 's the utmost of hi pilgrimag . exit provost 
 escalu . [ asid ] well , heaven forgiv him ! and forgiv us all ! 
 some rise by sin , and some by virtu fall ; 
 some run from break of ice , and answer none , 
 and some condemn for a fault alon . 
 
 enter elbow and offic with froth and pompey 
 
 elbow . come , bring them away ; if these be good peopl in a 
 commonw that do noth but use their abus in common hous , 
 i know no law ; bring them away . 
 angelo . how now , sir ! what 's your name , and what 's the matter ? 
 elbow . if it pleas your honour , i am the poor duke 's constabl , 
 and my name is elbow ; i do lean upon justic , sir , and do bring 
 in here befor your good honour two notori benefactor . 
 angelo . benefactor ! well- what benefactor are they ? are they not 
 malefactor ? 
 elbow . if it pleas your honour , i know not well what they are ; but 
 precis villain they are , that i am sure of , and void of all 
 profan in the world that good christian ought to have . 
 escalu . thi come off well ; here 's a wise offic . 
 angelo . go to ; what qualiti are they of ? elbow is your name ? whi 
 dost thou not speak , elbow ? 
 pompey . he can not , sir ; he 's out at elbow . 
 angelo . what are you , sir ? 
 elbow . he , sir ? a tapster , sir ; parcel-bawd ; one that serv a bad 
 woman ; whose hous , sir , wa , as they say , pluck 'd down in the 
 suburb ; and now she profess a hot-hous , which , i think , is a 
 veri ill hous too . 
 escalu . how know you that ? 
 elbow . my wife , sir , whom i detest befor heaven and your honour- 
 escalu . how ! thi wife ! 
 elbow . ay , sir ; whom i thank heaven , is an honest woman- 
 escalu . dost thou detest her therefor ? 
 elbow . i say , sir , i will detest myself also , as well as she , that 
 thi hous , if it be not a bawd 's hous , it is piti of her life , 
 for it is a naughti hous . 
 escalu . how dost thou know that , constabl ? 
 elbow . marri , sir , by my wife ; who , if she had been a woman 
 cardin given , might have been accu 'd in fornic , 
 adulteri , and all uncleanli there . 
 escalu . by the woman 's mean ? 
 elbow . ay , sir , by mistress overdon 's mean ; but as she spit in 
 hi face , so she defi him . 
 pompey . sir , if it pleas your honour , thi is not so . 
 elbow . prove it befor these varlet here , thou honour man , 
 prove it . 
 escalu . do you hear how he misplac ? 
 pompey . sir , she came in great with child ; and long , save your 
 honour 's rever , for stew 'd prune . sir , we had but two in the 
 hous , which at that veri distant time stood , as it were , in a 
 fruit dish , a dish of some three penc ; your honour have seen 
 such dish ; they are not china dish , but veri good dish . 
 escalu . go to , go to ; no matter for the dish , sir . 
 pompey . no , inde , sir , not of a pin ; you are therein in the 
 right ; but to the point . as i say , thi mistress elbow , be , as 
 i say , with child , and be great-belli , and long , as i 
 said , for prune ; and have but two in the dish , as i said , 
 master froth here , thi veri man , have eaten the rest , as i 
 said , and , as i say , pay for them veri honestli ; for , as you 
 know , master froth , i could not give you three penc again- 
 froth . no , inde . 
 pompey . veri well ; you be then , if you be rememb'r , crack 
 the stone of the foresaid prunes- 
 froth . ay , so i did inde . 
 pompey . whi , veri well ; i tell you then , if you be rememb'r , 
 that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you 
 wot of , unless they kept veri good diet , as i told you- 
 froth . all thi is true . 
 pompey . whi , veri well then- 
 escalu . come , you are a tediou fool . to the purpos : what wa 
 done to elbow 's wife that he hath caus to complain of ? come me 
 to what wa done to her . 
 pompey . sir , your honour can not come to that yet . 
 escalu . no , sir , nor i mean it not . 
 pompey . sir , but you shall come to it , by your honour 's leav . and , 
 i beseech you , look into master froth here , sir , a man of 
 fourscor pound a year ; whose father die at hallowmas- was't not 
 at hallowma , master froth ? 
 froth . all-hallond eve . 
 pompey . whi , veri well ; i hope here be truth . he , sir , sit , as 
 i say , in a lower chair , sir ; 't wa in the bunch of grape , 
 where , inde , you have a delight to sit , have you not ? 
 froth . i have so ; becaus it is an open room , and good for winter . 
 pompey . whi , veri well then ; i hope here be truth . 
 angelo . thi will last out a night in russia , 
 when night are longest there ; i 'll take my leav , 
 and leav you to the hear of the caus , 
 hope you 'll find good caus to whip them all . 
 escalu . i think no less . good morrow to your lordship . 
 [ exit angelo ] now , sir , come on ; what wa done to elbow 's wife , 
 onc more ? 
 pompey . onc ? - sir . there wa noth done to her onc . 
 elbow . i beseech you , sir , ask him what thi man did to my wife . 
 pompey . i beseech your honour , ask me . 
 escalu . well , sir , what did thi gentleman to her ? 
 pompey . i beseech you , sir , look in thi gentleman 's face . good 
 master froth , look upon hi honour ; 't is for a good purpos . doth 
 your honour mark hi face ? 
 escalu . ay , sir , veri well . 
 pompey . nay , i beseech you , mark it well . 
 escalu . well , i do so . 
 pompey . doth your honour see ani harm in hi face ? 
 escalu . whi , no . 
 pompey . i 'll be suppo 'd upon a book hi face is the worst thing 
 about him . good then ; if hi face be the worst thing about him , 
 how could master froth do the constabl 's wife ani harm ? i would 
 know that of your honour . 
 escalu . he 's in the right , constabl ; what say you to it ? 
 elbow . first , an it like you , the hous is a respect hous ; next , 
 thi is a respect fellow ; and hi mistress is a respect 
 woman . 
 pompey . by thi hand , sir , hi wife is a more respect person than 
 ani of us all . 
 elbow . varlet , thou liest ; thou liest , wicket varlet ; the time is 
 yet to come that she wa ever respect with man , woman , or 
 child . 
 pompey . sir , she wa respect with him befor he marri with her . 
 escalu . which is the wiser here , justic or iniqu ? is thi 
 true ? 
 elbow . o thou caitiff ! o thou varlet ! o thou wick hannib ! i 
 respect with her befor i wa marri to her ! if ever i wa 
 respect with her , or she with me , let not your worship think me 
 the poor duke 's offic . prove thi , thou wick hannib , or 
 i 'll have mine action of batt'ri on thee . 
 escalu . if he took you a box o ' th ' ear , you might have your 
 action of slander too . 
 elbow . marri , i thank your good worship for it . what is't your 
 worship 's pleasur i shall do with thi wick caitiff ? 
 escalu . truli , offic , becaus he hath some offenc in him that 
 thou wouldst discov if thou couldst , let him continu in hi 
 cours till thou know'st what they are . 
 elbow . marri , i thank your worship for it . thou seest , thou wick 
 varlet , now , what 's come upon thee : thou art to continu now , 
 thou varlet ; thou art to continu . 
 escalu . where were you born , friend ? 
 froth . here in vienna , sir . 
 escalu . are you of fourscor pound a year ? 
 froth . ye , a n't pleas you , sir . 
 escalu . so . what trade are you of , sir ? 
 pompey . a tapster , a poor widow 's tapster . 
 escalu . your mistress ' name ? 
 pompey . mistress overdon . 
 escalu . hath she had ani more than one husband ? 
 pompey . nine , sir ; overdon by the last . 
 escalu . nine ! come hither to me , master froth . master froth , i 
 would not have you acquaint with tapster : they will draw you , 
 master froth , and you will hang them . get you gone , and let me 
 hear no more of you . 
 froth . i thank your worship . for mine own part , i never come into 
 ani room in a taphous but i am drawn in . 
 escalu . well , no more of it , master froth ; farewel . [ exit froth ] 
 come you hither to me , master tapster ; what 's your name , master 
 tapster ? 
 pompey . pompey . 
 escalu . what els ? 
 pompey . bum , sir . 
 escalu . troth , and your bum is the greatest thing about you ; so 
 that , in the beastliest sens , you are pompey the great . pompey , 
 you are partli a bawd , pompey , howsoev you colour it in be a 
 tapster . are you not ? come , tell me true ; it shall be the better 
 for you . 
 pompey . truli , sir , i am a poor fellow that would live . 
 escalu . how would you live , pompey- by be a bawd ? what do you 
 think of the trade , pompey ? is it a law trade ? 
 pompey . if the law would allow it , sir . 
 escalu . but the law will not allow it , pompey ; nor it shall not be 
 allow in vienna . 
 pompey . doe your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of 
 the citi ? 
 escalu . no , pompey . 
 pompey . truli , sir , in my poor opinion , they will to't then . if 
 your worship will take order for the drab and the knave , you 
 need not to fear the bawd . 
 escalu . there is pretti order begin , i can tell you : but it 
 is but head and hang . 
 pompey . if you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten 
 year togeth , you 'll be glad to give out a commiss for more 
 head ; if thi law hold in vienna ten year , i 'll rent the fairest 
 hous in it , after threepenc a bay . if you live to see thi come 
 to pass , say pompey told you so . 
 escalu . thank you , good pompey ; and , in requit of your propheci , 
 hark you : i advis you , let me not find you befor me again upon 
 ani complaint whatsoever- no , not for dwell where you do ; if i 
 do , pompey , i shall beat you to your tent , and prove a shrewd 
 caesar to you ; in plain deal , pompey , i shall have you whipt . 
 so for thi time , pompey , fare you well . 
 pompey . i thank your worship for your good counsel ; [ asid ] but i 
 shall follow it as the flesh and fortun shall better determin . 
 whip me ? no , no ; let carman whip hi jade ; 
 the valiant heart 's not whipt out of hi trade . exit 
 escalu . come hither to me , master elbow ; come hither , master 
 constabl . how long have you been in thi place of constabl ? 
 elbow . seven year and a half , sir . 
 escalu . i thought , by the readi in the offic , you had 
 continu in it some time . you say seven year togeth ? 
 elbow . and a half , sir . 
 escalu . ala , it hath been great pain to you ! they do you wrong 
 to put you so oft upo n't . are there not men in your ward 
 suffici to serv it ? 
 elbow . faith , sir , few of ani wit in such matter ; as they are 
 chosen , they are glad to choos me for them ; i do it for some 
 piec of money , and go through with all . 
 escalu . look you , bring me in the name of some six or seven , the 
 most suffici of your parish . 
 elbow . to your worship 's hous , sir ? 
 escalu . to my hous . fare you well . [ exit elbow ] 
 what 's o'clock , think you ? 
 justic . eleven , sir . 
 escalu . i pray you home to dinner with me . 
 justic . i humbl thank you . 
 escalu . it griev me for the death of claudio ; 
 but there 's no remedi . 
 justic . lord angelo is sever . 
 escalu . it is but need : 
 merci is not itself that oft look so ; 
 pardon is still the nurs of second woe . 
 but yet , poor claudio ! there is no remedi . 
 come , sir . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 anoth room in angelo 's hous 
 
 enter provost and a servant 
 
 servant . he 's hear of a caus ; he will come straight . 
 i 'll tell him of you . 
 provost . pray you do . [ exit servant ] i 'll know 
 hi pleasur ; may be he will relent . ala , 
 he hath but as offend in a dream ! 
 all sect , all age , smack of thi vice ; and he 
 to die for 't ! 
 
 enter angelo 
 
 angelo . now , what 's the matter , provost ? 
 provost . is it your will claudio shall die to-morrow ? 
 angelo . did not i tell thee yea ? hadst thou not order ? 
 whi dost thou ask again ? 
 provost . lest i might be too rash ; 
 under your good correct , i have seen 
 when , after execut , judgment hath 
 repent o'er hi doom . 
 angelo . go to ; let that be mine . 
 do you your offic , or give up your place , 
 and you shall well be spar 'd . 
 provost . i crave your honour 's pardon . 
 what shall be done , sir , with the groan juliet ? 
 she 's veri near her hour . 
 angelo . dispos of her 
 to some more fitter place , and that with speed . 
 
 re-ent servant 
 
 servant . here is the sister of the man condemn 'd 
 desir access to you . 
 angelo . hath he a sister ? 
 provost . ay , my good lord ; a veri virtuou maid , 
 and to be shortli of a sisterhood , 
 if not alreadi . 
 angelo . well , let her be admit . exit servant 
 see you the fornicatress be remov 'd ; 
 let her have need but not lavish mean ; 
 there shall be order for't . 
 
 enter lucio and isabella 
 
 provost . [ go ] save your honour ! 
 angelo . stay a littl while . [ to isabella ] y'are welcom ; what 's 
 your will ? 
 isabella . i am a woeful suitor to your honour , 
 pleas but your honour hear me . 
 angelo . well ; what 's your suit ? 
 isabella . there is a vice that most i do abhor , 
 and most desir should meet the blow of justic ; 
 for which i would not plead , but that i must ; 
 for which i must not plead , but that i am 
 at war 'twixt will and will not . 
 angelo . well ; the matter ? 
 isabella . i have a brother is condemn 'd to die ; 
 i do beseech you , let it be hi fault , 
 and not my brother . 
 provost . [ asid ] heaven give thee move grace . 
 angelo . condemn the fault and not the actor of it ! 
 whi , everi fault 's condemn 'd ere it be done ; 
 mine were the veri cipher of a function , 
 to fine the fault whose fine stand in record , 
 and let go by the actor . 
 isabella . o just but sever law ! 
 i had a brother , then . heaven keep your honour ! 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] give't not o'er so ; to him again , entreat him , 
 kneel down befor him , hang upon hi gown ; 
 you are too cold : if you should need a pin , 
 you could not with more tame a tongu desir it . 
 to him , i say . 
 isabella . must he need die ? 
 angelo . maiden , no remedi . 
 isabella . ye ; i do think that you might pardon him . 
 and neither heaven nor man griev at the merci . 
 angelo . i will not do't . 
 isabella . but can you , if you would ? 
 angelo . look , what i will not , that i can not do . 
 isabella . but might you do't , and do the world no wrong , 
 if so your heart were touch 'd with that remors 
 as mine is to him ? 
 angelo . he 's sentenc 'd ; 't is too late . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] you are too cold . 
 isabella . too late ? whi , no ; i , that do speak a word , 
 may call it back again . well , believ thi : 
 no ceremoni that to great one long , 
 not the king 's crown nor the deput sword , 
 the marshal 's truncheon nor the judg 's robe , 
 becom them with one half so good a grace 
 as merci doe . 
 if he had been as you , and you as he , 
 you would have slipp 'd like him ; but he , like you , 
 would not have been so stern . 
 angelo . pray you be gone . 
 isabella . i would to heaven i had your potenc , 
 and you were isabel ! should it then be thu ? 
 no ; i would tell what 'twere to be a judg 
 and what a prison . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] ay , touch him ; there 's the vein . 
 angelo . your brother is a forfeit of the law , 
 and you but wast your word . 
 isabella . ala ! ala ! 
 whi , all the soul that were were forfeit onc ; 
 and he that might the vantag best have took 
 found out the remedi . how would you be 
 if he , which is the top of judgment , should 
 but judg you as you are ? o , think on that ; 
 and merci then will breath within your lip , 
 like man new made . 
 angelo . be you content , fair maid . 
 it is the law , not i condemn your brother . 
 were he my kinsman , brother , or my son , 
 it should be thu with him . he must die to-morrow . 
 isabella . to-morrow ! o , that 's sudden ! spare him , spare him . 
 he 's not prepar 'd for death . even for our kitchen 
 we kill the fowl of season ; shall we serv heaven 
 with less respect than we do minist 
 to our gross selv ? good , good my lord , bethink you . 
 who is it that hath die for thi offenc ? 
 there 's mani have commit it . 
 lucio . [ asid ] ay , well said . 
 angelo . the law hath not been dead , though it hath slept . 
 those mani had not dar 'd to do that evil 
 if the first that did th ' edict infring 
 had answer 'd for hi deed . now 't is awak , 
 take note of what is done , and , like a prophet , 
 look in a glass that show what futur evils- 
 either now or by remiss new conceiv 'd , 
 and so in progress to be hatch 'd and born- 
 are now to have no success degre , 
 but here they live to end . 
 isabella . yet show some piti . 
 angelo . i show it most of all when i show justic ; 
 for then i piti those i do not know , 
 which a dismiss 'd offenc would after gall , 
 and do him right that , answer one foul wrong , 
 live not to act anoth . be satisfi ; 
 your brother die to-morrow ; be content . 
 isabella . so you must be the first that give thi sentenc , 
 and he that suffer . o , it is excel 
 to have a giant 's strength ! but it is tyrann 
 to use it like a giant . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] that 's well said . 
 isabella . could great men thunder 
 as jove himself doe , jove would never be quiet , 
 for everi pelt petti offic 
 would use hi heaven for thunder , 
 noth but thunder . merci heaven , 
 thou rather , with thi sharp and sulphur bolt , 
 split the unwedg and gnarl oak 
 than the soft myrtl . but man , proud man , 
 dress 'd in a littl brief author , 
 most ignor of what he 's most assur 'd , 
 hi glassi essenc , like an angri ape , 
 play such fantast trick befor high heaven 
 as make the angel weep ; who , with our speen , 
 would all themselv laugh mortal . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] o , to him , to him , wench ! he will relent ; 
 he 's come ; i perceiv 't . 
 provost . [ asid ] pray heaven she win him . 
 isabella . we can not weigh our brother with ourself . 
 great men may jest with saint : 't is wit in them ; 
 but in the less foul profan . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] thou'rt i ' th ' right , girl ; more o ' that . 
 isabella . that in the captain 's but a choler word 
 which in the soldier is flat blasphemi . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] art avi 'd o ' that ? more o n't . 
 angelo . whi do you put these say upon me ? 
 isabella . becaus author , though it err like other , 
 hath yet a kind of medicin in itself 
 that skin the vice o ' th ' top . go to your bosom , 
 knock there , and ask your heart what it doth know 
 that 's like my brother 's fault . if it confess 
 a natur guilti such as is hi , 
 let it not sound a thought upon your tongu 
 against my brother 's life . 
 angelo . [ asid ] she speak , and 't is 
 such sens that my sens breed with it.- fare you well . 
 isabella . gentl my lord , turn back . 
 angelo . i will bethink me . come again to-morrow . 
 isabella . hark how i 'll bribe you ; good my lord , turn back . 
 angelo . how , bribe me ? 
 isabella . ay , with such gift that heaven shall share with you . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ) you had marr 'd all els . 
 isabella . not with fond sicl of the test gold , 
 or stone , whose rate are either rich or poor 
 as fanci valu them ; but with true prayer 
 that shall be up at heaven and enter there 
 ere sun-ris , prayer from preserv soul , 
 from fast maid , whose mind are dedic 
 to noth tempor . 
 angelo . well ; come to me to-morrow . 
 lucio . [ to isabella ] go to ; 't is well ; away . 
 isabella . heaven keep your honour safe ! 
 angelo . [ asid ] amen ; for i 
 am that way go to temptat 
 where prayer cross . 
 isabella . at what hour to-morrow 
 shall i attend your lordship ? 
 angelo . at ani time 'fore noon . 
 isabella . save your honour ! exeunt all but angelo 
 angelo . from thee ; even from thi virtu ! 
 what 's thi , what 's thi ? is thi her fault or mine ? 
 the tempter or the tempt , who sin most ? 
 ha ! 
 not she ; nor doth she tempt ; but it is i 
 that , lie by the violet in the sun , 
 do as the carrion doe , not as the flow ' r , 
 corrupt with virtuou season . can it be 
 that modesti may more betray our sens 
 than woman 's light ? have wast ground enough , 
 shall we desir to raze the sanctuari , 
 and pitch our evil there ? o , fie , fie , fie ! 
 what dost thou , or what art thou , angelo ? 
 dost thou desir her foulli for those thing 
 that make her good ? o , let her brother live ! 
 thiev for their robberi have author 
 when judg steal themselv . what , do i love her , 
 that i desir to hear her speak again , 
 and feast upon her eye ? what is't i dream on ? 
 o cun enemi , that , to catch a saint , 
 with saint dost bait thi hook ! most danger 
 is that temptat that doth goad us on 
 to sin in love virtu . never could the strumpet , 
 with all her doubl vigour , art and natur , 
 onc stir my temper ; but thi virtuou maid 
 subdu me quit . ever till now , 
 when men were fond , i smil 'd and wond'r how . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a prison 
 
 enter , sever , duke , disguis as a friar , and provost 
 
 duke . hail to you , provost ! so i think you are . 
 provost . i am the provost . what 's your will , good friar ? 
 duke . bound by my chariti and my blest order , 
 i come to visit the afflict spirit 
 here in the prison . do me the common right 
 to let me see them , and to make me know 
 the natur of their crime , that i may minist 
 to them accordingli . 
 provost . i would do more than that , if more were need . 
 
 enter juliet 
 
 look , here come one ; a gentlewoman of mine , 
 who , fall in the flaw of her own youth , 
 hath blister 'd her report . she is with child ; 
 and he that got it , sentenc'd- a young man 
 more fit to do anoth such offenc 
 than die for thi . 
 duke . when must he die ? 
 provost . as i do think , to-morrow . 
 [ to juliet ] i have provid for you ; stay awhil 
 and you shall be conduct . 
 duke . repent you , fair one , of the sin you carri ? 
 juliet . i do ; and bear the shame most patient . 
 duke . i 'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscienc , 
 and tri your penit , if it be sound 
 or hollowli put on . 
 juliet . i 'll gladli learn . 
 duke . love you the man that wrong 'd you ? 
 juliet . ye , as i love the woman that wrong 'd him . 
 duke . so then , it seem , your most offenc act 
 wa mutual commit . 
 juliet . mutual . 
 duke . then wa your sin of heavier kind than hi . 
 juliet . i do confess it , and repent it , father . 
 duke . 't is meet so , daughter ; but lest you do repent 
 as that the sin hath brought you to thi shame , 
 which sorrow is alway toward ourselv , not heaven , 
 show we would not spare heaven as we love it , 
 but as we stand in fear- 
 juliet . i do repent me as it is an evil , 
 and take the shame with joy . 
 duke . there rest . 
 your partner , as i hear , must die to-morrow , 
 and i am go with instruct to him . 
 grace go with you ! benedicit ! exit 
 juliet . must die to-morrow ! o , injuri law , 
 that respit me a life whose veri comfort 
 is still a die horror ! 
 provost . 't is piti of him . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 angelo 's hous 
 
 enter angelo 
 
 angelo . when i would pray and think , i think and pray 
 to sever subject . heaven hath my empti word , 
 whilst my invent , hear not my tongu , 
 anchor on isabel . heaven in my mouth , 
 as if i did but onli chew hi name , 
 and in my heart the strong and swell evil 
 of my concept . the state whereon i studi 
 is , like a good thing be often read , 
 grown sere and tediou ; yea , my graviti , 
 wherein- let no man hear me- i take pride , 
 could i with boot chang for an idl plume 
 which the air beat for vain . o place , o form , 
 how often dost thou with thi case , thi habit , 
 wrench awe from fool , and tie the wiser soul 
 to thi fals seem ! blood , thou art blood . 
 let 's write 'good angel ' on the devil 's horn ; 
 't is not the devil 's crest . 
 
 enter servant 
 
 how now , who 's there ? 
 servant . one isabel , a sister , desir access to you . 
 angelo . teach her the way . [ exit servant ] o heaven ! 
 whi doe my blood thu muster to my heart , 
 make both it unabl for itself 
 and dispossess all my other part 
 of necessari fit ? 
 so play the foolish throng with one that swoon ; 
 come all to help him , and so stop the air 
 by which he should reviv ; and even so 
 the gener subject to a well-wish 'd king 
 quit their own part , and in obsequi fond 
 crowd to hi presenc , where their untaught love 
 must need appear offenc . 
 
 enter isabella 
 
 how now , fair maid ? 
 isabella . i am come to know your pleasur . 
 angelo . that you might know it would much better pleas me 
 than to demand what 't is . your brother can not live . 
 isabella . even so ! heaven keep your honour ! 
 angelo . yet may he live awhil , and , it may be , 
 as long as you or i ; yet he must die . 
 isabella . under your sentenc ? 
 angelo . yea . 
 isabella . when ? i beseech you ; that in hi repriev , 
 longer or shorter , he may be so fit 
 that hi soul sicken not . 
 angelo . ha ! fie , these filthi vice ! it were as good 
 to pardon him that hath from natur stol'n 
 a man alreadi made , as to remit 
 their sauci sweet that do coin heaven 's imag 
 in stamp that are forbid ; 't is all as easi 
 fals to take away a life true made 
 as to put metal in restrain mean 
 to make a fals one . 
 isabella . 't is set down so in heaven , but not in earth . 
 angelo . say you so ? then i shall pose you quickli . 
 which had you rather- that the most just law 
 now took your brother 's life ; or , to redeem him , 
 give up your bodi to such sweet unclean 
 as she that he hath stain 'd ? 
 isabella . sir , believ thi : 
 i had rather give my bodi than my soul . 
 angelo . i talk not of your soul ; our compel 'd sin 
 stand more for number than for accompt . 
 isabella . how say you ? 
 angelo . nay , i 'll not warrant that ; for i can speak 
 against the thing i say . answer to thi : 
 i , now the voic of the record law , 
 pronounc a sentenc on your brother 's life ; 
 might there not be a chariti in sin 
 to save thi brother 's life ? 
 isabella . pleas you to do't , 
 i 'll take it as a peril to my soul 
 it is no sin at all , but chariti . 
 angelo . plea 'd you to do't at peril of your soul , 
 were equal pois of sin and chariti . 
 isabella . that i do beg hi life , if it be sin , 
 heaven let me bear it ! you grant of my suit , 
 if that be sin , i 'll make it my morn prayer 
 to have it ad to the fault of mine , 
 and noth of your answer . 
 angelo . nay , but hear me ; 
 your sens pursu not mine ; either you are ignor 
 or seem so , craftili ; and that 's not good . 
 isabella . let me be ignor , and in noth good 
 but gracious to know i am no better . 
 angelo . thu wisdom wish to appear most bright 
 when it doth tax itself ; as these black mask 
 proclaim an enshield beauti ten time louder 
 than beauti could , display 'd . but mark me : 
 to be receiv plain , i 'll speak more gross- 
 your brother is to die . 
 isabella . so . 
 angelo . and hi offenc is so , as it appear , 
 account to the law upon that pain . 
 isabella . true . 
 angelo . admit no other way to save hi life , 
 as i subscrib not that , nor ani other , 
 but , in the loss of question , that you , hi sister , 
 find yourself desir 'd of such a person 
 whose credit with the judg , or own great place , 
 could fetch your brother from the manacl 
 of the all-bind law ; and that there were 
 no earthli mean to save him but that either 
 you must lay down the treasur of your bodi 
 to thi suppos , or els to let him suffer- 
 what would you do ? 
 isabella . as much for my poor brother as myself ; 
 that is , were i under the term of death , 
 th ' impress of keen whip i 'd wear as rubi , 
 and strip myself to death as to a bed 
 that long have been sick for , ere i 'd yield 
 my bodi up to shame . 
 angelo . then must your brother die . 
 isabella . and 'twere the cheaper way : 
 better it were a brother die at onc 
 than that a sister , by redeem him , 
 should die for ever . 
 angelo . were not you , then , as cruel as the sentenc 
 that you have slander 'd so ? 
 isabella . ignomini in ransom and free pardon 
 are of two hous : law merci 
 is noth kin to foul redempt . 
 angelo . you seem 'd of late to make the law a tyrant ; 
 and rather prov 'd the slide of your brother 
 a merriment than a vice . 
 isabella . o , pardon me , my lord ! it oft fall out , 
 to have what we would have , we speak not what we mean : 
 i someth do excus the thing i hate 
 for hi advantag that i dearli love . 
 angelo . we are all frail . 
 isabella . els let my brother die , 
 if not a fedari but onli he 
 owe and succeed thi weak . 
 angelo . nay , women are frail too . 
 isabella . ay , as the glass where they view themselv , 
 which are as easi broke as they make form . 
 women , help heaven ! men their creation mar 
 in profit by them . nay , call us ten time frail ; 
 for we are soft as our complexion are , 
 and credul to fals print . 
 angelo . i think it well ; 
 and from thi testimoni of your own sex , 
 sinc i suppos we are made to be no stronger 
 than fault may shake our frame , let me be bold . 
 i do arrest your word . be that you are , 
 that is , a woman ; if you be more , you 're none ; 
 if you be one , as you are well express 'd 
 by all extern warrant , show it now 
 by put on the destin 'd liveri . 
 isabella . i have no tongu but one ; gentl , my lord , 
 let me intreat you speak the former languag . 
 angelo . plainli conceiv , i love you . 
 isabella . my brother did love juliet , 
 and you tell me that he shall die for't . 
 angelo . he shall not , isabel , if you give me love . 
 isabella . i know your virtu hath a licens i n't , 
 which seem a littl fouler than it is , 
 to pluck on other . 
 angelo . believ me , on mine honour , 
 my word express my purpos . 
 isabella . ha ! littl honour to be much believ 'd , 
 and most pernici purpos ! seem , seem ! 
 i will proclaim thee , angelo , look for't . 
 sign me a present pardon for my brother 
 or , with an outstretch 'd throat , i 'll tell the world aloud 
 what man thou art . 
 angelo . who will believ thee , isabel ? 
 my unsoil 'd name , th ' auster of my life , 
 my vouch against you , and my place i ' th ' state , 
 will so your accus overweigh 
 that you shall stifl in your own report , 
 and smell of calumni . i have begun , 
 and now i give my sensual race the rein : 
 fit thi consent to my sharp appetit ; 
 lay by all niceti and prolixi blush 
 that banish what they sue for ; redeem thi brother 
 by yield up thi bodi to my will ; 
 or els he must not onli die the death , 
 but thi unkind shall hi death draw out 
 to ling'r suffer . answer me to-morrow , 
 or , by the affect that now guid me most , 
 i 'll prove a tyrant to him . as for you , 
 say what you can : my fals o'erweigh your true . exit 
 isabella . to whom should i complain ? did i tell thi , 
 who would believ me ? o peril mouth 
 that bear in them one and the self-sam tongu 
 either of condemn or approof , 
 bid the law make curtsi to their will ; 
 hook both right and wrong to th ' appetit , 
 to follow as it draw ! i 'll to my brother . 
 though he hath fall'n by promptur of the blood , 
 yet hath he in him such a mind of honour 
 that , had he twenti head to tender down 
 on twenti bloodi block , he 'd yield them up 
 befor hi sister should her bodi stoop 
 to such abhorr 'd pollut . 
 then , isabel , live chast , and , brother , die : 
 more than our brother is our chastiti . 
 i 'll tell him yet of angelo 's request , 
 and fit hi mind to death , for hi soul 's rest . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 the prison 
 
 enter duke , disguis as befor , claudio , and provost 
 
 duke . so , then you hope of pardon from lord angelo ? 
 claudio . the miser have no other medicin 
 but onli hope : 
 i have hope to eve , and am prepar 'd to die . 
 duke . be absolut for death ; either death or life 
 shall therebi be the sweeter . reason thu with life . 
 if i do lose thee , i do lose a thing 
 that none but fool would keep . a breath thou art , 
 servil to all the skyey influenc , 
 that dost thi habit where thou keep'st 
 hourli afflict . mere , thou art death 's fool ; 
 for him thou labour'st by thi flight to shun 
 and yet run'st toward him still . thou art not nobl ; 
 for all th ' accommod that thou bear'st 
 are nur 'd by base . thou 'rt by no mean valiant ; 
 for thou dost fear the soft and tender fork 
 of a poor worm . thi best of rest is sleep , 
 and that thou oft provok'st ; yet grossli fear'st 
 thi death , which is no more . thou art not thyself ; 
 for thou exist on mani a thousand grain 
 that issu out of dust . happi thou art not ; 
 for what thou hast not , still thou striv'st to get , 
 and what thou hast , forget'st . thou art not certain ; 
 for thi complexion shift to strang effect , 
 after the moon . if thou art rich , thou'rt poor ; 
 for , like an ass whose back with ingot bow , 
 thou bear'st thi heavi rich but a journey , 
 and death unload thee . friend hast thou none ; 
 for thine own bowel which do call thee sire , 
 the mere effus of thi proper loin , 
 do curs the gout , serpigo , and the rheum , 
 for end thee no sooner . thou hast nor youth nor age , 
 but , as it were , an after-dinn 's sleep , 
 dream on both ; for all thi bless youth 
 becom as age , and doth beg the alm 
 of palsi eld ; and when thou art old and rich , 
 thou hast neither heat , affect , limb , nor beauti , 
 to make thi rich pleasant . what 's yet in thi 
 that bear the name of life ? yet in thi life 
 lie hid moe thousand death ; yet death we fear , 
 that make these odd all even . 
 claudio . i humbl thank you . 
 to sue to live , i find i seek to die ; 
 and , seek death , find life . let it come on . 
 isabella . [ within ] what , ho ! peac here ; grace and good compani ! 
 provost . who 's there ? come in ; the wish deserv a welcom . 
 duke . dear sir , ere long i 'll visit you again . 
 claudio . most holi sir , i thank you . 
 
 enter isabella 
 
 isabella . my busi is a word or two with claudio . 
 provost . and veri welcom . look , signior , here 's your sister . 
 duke . provost , a word with you . 
 provost . as mani as you pleas . 
 duke . bring me to hear them speak , where i may be conceal 'd . 
 exeunt duke and provost 
 claudio . now , sister , what 's the comfort ? 
 isabella . whi , 
 as all comfort are ; most good , most good , inde . 
 lord angelo , have affair to heaven , 
 intend you for hi swift ambassador , 
 where you shall be an everlast leiger . 
 therefor , your best appoint make with speed ; 
 to-morrow you set on . 
 claudio . is there no remedi ? 
 isabella . none , but such remedi as , to save a head , 
 to cleav a heart in twain . 
 claudio . but is there ani ? 
 isabella . ye , brother , you may live : 
 there is a devilish merci in the judg , 
 if you 'll implor it , that will free your life , 
 but fetter you till death . 
 claudio . perpetu duranc ? 
 isabella . ay , just ; perpetu duranc , a restraint , 
 though all the world 's vastid you had , 
 to a determin 'd scope . 
 claudio . but in what natur ? 
 isabella . in such a one as , you consent to't , 
 would bark your honour from that trunk you bear , 
 and leav you nake . 
 claudio . let me know the point . 
 isabella . o , i do fear thee , claudio ; and i quak , 
 lest thou a fever life shouldst entertain , 
 and six or seven winter more respect 
 than a perpetu honour . dar'st thou die ? 
 the sens of death is most in apprehens ; 
 and the poor beetl that we tread upon 
 in corpor suffer find a pang as great 
 as when a giant die . 
 claudio . whi give you me thi shame ? 
 think you i can a resolut fetch 
 from flow'ri tender ? if i must die , 
 i will encount dark as a bride 
 and hug it in mine arm . 
 isabella . there spake my brother ; there my father 's grave 
 did utter forth a voic . ye , thou must die : 
 thou art too nobl to conserv a life 
 in base applianc . thi outward-saint deputi , 
 whose settl visag and deliber word 
 nip youth i ' th ' head , and folli doth enew 
 as falcon doth the fowl , is yet a devil ; 
 hi filth within be cast , he would appear 
 a pond as deep as hell . 
 claudio . the precis angelo ! 
 isabella . o , 't is the cun liveri of hell 
 the damned'st bodi to invest and cover 
 in precis guard ! dost thou think , claudio , 
 if i would yield him my virgin 
 thou mightst be freed ? 
 claudio . o heaven ! it can not be . 
 isabella . ye , he would give't thee , from thi rank offenc , 
 so to offend him still . thi night 's the time 
 that i should do what i abhor to name , 
 or els thou diest to-morrow . 
 claudio . thou shalt not do't . 
 isabella . o , were it but my life ! 
 i 'd throw it down for your deliver 
 as frankli as a pin . 
 claudio . thank , dear isabel . 
 isabella . be readi , claudio , for your death to-morrow . 
 claudio . ye . ha he affect in him 
 that thu can make him bite the law by th ' nose 
 when he would forc it ? sure it is no sin ; 
 or of the deadli seven it is the least . 
 isabella . which is the least ? 
 claudio . if it were damnabl , he be so wise , 
 whi would he for the momentari trick 
 be perdur fin 'd ? - o isabel ! 
 isabella . what say my brother ? 
 claudio . death is a fear thing . 
 isabella . and shame life a hate . 
 claudio . ay , but to die , and go we know not where ; 
 to lie in cold obstruct , and to rot ; 
 thi sensibl warm motion to becom 
 a knead clod ; and the delight spirit 
 to bath in fieri flood or to resid 
 in thrill region of thick-rib ice ; 
 to be imprison 'd in the viewless wind , 
 and blown with restless violenc round about 
 the pendent world ; or to be wors than worst 
 of those that lawless and incertain thought 
 imagin howling- 't is too horribl . 
 the weariest and most loath worldli life 
 that age , ach , penuri , and imprison , 
 can lay on natur is a paradis 
 to what we fear of death . 
 isabella . ala , ala ! 
 claudio . sweet sister , let me live . 
 what sin you do to save a brother 's life , 
 natur dispens with the deed so far 
 that it becom a virtu . 
 isabella . o you beast ! 
 o faithless coward ! o dishonest wretch ! 
 wilt thou be made a man out of my vice ? 
 is't not a kind of incest to take life 
 from thine own sister 's shame ? what should i think ? 
 heaven shield my mother play 'd my father fair ! 
 for such a warp slip of wilder 
 ne'er issu 'd from hi blood . take my defianc ; 
 die ; perish . might but my bend down 
 repriev thee from thi fate , it should proceed . 
 i 'll pray a thousand prayer for thi death , 
 no word to save thee . 
 claudio . nay , hear me , isabel . 
 isabella . o fie , fie , fie ! 
 thi sin 's not accident , but a trade . 
 merci to thee would prove itself a bawd ; 
 't is best that thou diest quickli . 
 claudio . o , hear me , isabella . 
 
 re-ent duke 
 
 duke . vouchsaf a word , young sister , but one word . 
 isabella . what is your will ? 
 duke . might you dispens with your leisur , i would by and by have 
 some speech with you ; the satisfact i would requir is 
 likewis your own benefit . 
 isabella . i have no superflu leisur ; my stay must be stolen out 
 of other affair ; but i will attend you awhil . 
 [ walk apart ] 
 duke . son , i have overheard what hath pass 'd between you and your 
 sister . angelo had never the purpos to corrupt her ; onli he hath 
 made an assay of her virtu to practis hi judgment with the 
 disposit of natur . she , have the truth of honour in her , 
 hath made him that graciou denial which he is most glad to 
 receiv . i am confessor to angelo , and i know thi to be true ; 
 therefor prepar yourself to death . do not satisfi your 
 resolut with hope that are fallibl ; to-morrow you must die ; 
 go to your knee and make readi . 
 claudio . let me ask my sister pardon . i am so out of love with life 
 that i will sue to be rid of it . 
 duke . hold you there . farewel . [ exit claudio ] provost , a word with 
 you . 
 
 re-ent provost 
 
 provost . what 's your will , father ? 
 duke . that , now you are come , you will be gone . leav me a while 
 with the maid ; my mind promis with my habit no loss shall touch 
 her by my compani . 
 provost . in good time . exit provost 
 duke . the hand that hath made you fair hath made you good ; the 
 good that is cheap in beauti make beauti brief in good ; 
 but grace , be the soul of your complexion , shall keep the bodi 
 of it ever fair . the assault that angelo hath made to you , 
 fortun hath convey 'd to my understand ; and , but that frailti 
 hath exampl for hi fall , i should wonder at angelo . how 
 will you do to content thi substitut , and to save your brother ? 
 isabella . i am now go to resolv him ; i had rather my brother 
 die by the law than my son should be unlaw born . but , o , how 
 much is the good duke deceiv 'd in angelo ! if ever he return , and 
 i can speak to him , i will open my lip in vain , or discov hi 
 govern . 
 duke . that shall not be much amiss ; yet , as the matter now stand , 
 he will avoid your accus : he made trial of you onli . 
 therefor fasten your ear on my advis ; to the love i have in 
 do good a remedi present itself . i do make myself believ 
 that you may most upright do a poor wrong ladi a merit 
 benefit ; redeem your brother from the angri law ; do no stain to 
 your own graciou person ; and much pleas the absent duke , if 
 peradventur he shall ever return to have hear of thi 
 busi . 
 isabella . let me hear you speak farther ; i have spirit to do 
 anyth that appear not foul in the truth of my spirit . 
 duke . virtu is bold , and good never fear . have you not 
 heard speak of mariana , the sister of frederick , the great 
 soldier who miscarri at sea ? 
 isabella . i have heard of the ladi , and good word went with her 
 name . 
 duke . she should thi angelo have marri ; wa affianc to her by 
 oath , and the nuptial appoint ; between which time of the 
 contract and limit of the solemn her brother frederick wa 
 wreck 'd at sea , have in that perish vessel the dowri of hi 
 sister . but mark how heavili thi befel to the poor gentlewoman : 
 there she lost a nobl and renown brother , in hi love toward 
 her ever most kind and natur ; with him the portion and sinew of 
 her fortun , her marriage-dowri ; with both , her combin 
 husband , thi well-seem angelo . 
 isabella . can thi be so ? did angelo so leav her ? 
 duke . left her in her tear , and dri not one of them with hi 
 comfort ; swallow hi vow whole , pretend in her discoveri 
 of dishonour ; in few , bestow 'd her on her own lament , which 
 she yet wear for hi sake ; and he , a marbl to her tear , is 
 wash with them , but relent not . 
 isabella . what a merit were it in death to take thi poor maid from 
 the world ! what corrupt in thi life that it will let thi man 
 live ! but how out of thi can she avail ? 
 duke . it is a ruptur that you may easili heal ; and the cure of it 
 not onli save your brother , but keep you from dishonour in 
 do it . 
 isabella . show me how , good father . 
 duke . thi forenam maid hath yet in her the continu of her 
 first affect ; hi unjust unkind , that in all reason should 
 have quench her love , hath , like an impedi in the current , 
 made it more violent and unruli . go you to angelo ; answer hi 
 requir with a plausibl obedi ; agre with hi demand to 
 the point ; onli refer yourself to thi advantag : first , that 
 your stay with him may not be long ; that the time may have all 
 shadow and silenc in it ; and the place answer to conveni . 
 thi be grant in course- and now follow all : we shall 
 advis thi wrong maid to stead up your appoint , go in your 
 place . if the encount acknowledg itself hereaft , it may 
 compel him to her recompens ; and here , by thi , is your brother 
 save , your honour untaint , the poor mariana advantag , and 
 the corrupt deputi scale . the maid will i frame and make fit for 
 hi attempt . if you think well to carri thi as you may , the 
 doubl of the benefit defend the deceit from reproof . what 
 think you of it ? 
 isabella . the imag of it give me content alreadi ; and i trust it 
 will grow to a most prosper perfect . 
 duke . it lie much in your hold up . hast you speedili to 
 angelo ; if for thi night he entreat you to hi bed , give him 
 promis of satisfact . i will present to saint luke 's ; there , 
 at the moat grang , resid thi deject mariana . at that 
 place call upon me ; and dispatch with angelo , that it may be 
 quickli . 
 isabella . i thank you for thi comfort . fare you well , good father . 
 exeunt sever 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the street befor the prison 
 
 enter , on one side , duke disguis as befor ; on the other , elbow , 
 and offic with pompey 
 
 elbow . nay , if there be no remedi for it , but that you will need 
 buy and sell men and women like beast , we shall have all the 
 world drink brown and white bastard . 
 duke . o heaven ! what stuff is here ? 
 pompey . 't wa never merri world sinc , of two usuri , the merriest 
 wa put down , and the worser allow 'd by order of law a furr 'd 
 gown to keep him warm ; and furr 'd with fox on lamb-skin too , to 
 signifi that craft , be richer than innoc , stand for the 
 face . 
 elbow . come your way , sir . bless you , good father friar . 
 duke . and you , good brother father . what offenc hath thi man made 
 you , sir ? 
 elbow . marri , sir , he hath offend the law ; and , sir , we take him 
 to be a thief too , sir , for we have found upon him , sir , a 
 strang picklock , which we have sent to the deputi . 
 duke . fie , sirrah , a bawd , a wick bawd ! 
 the evil that thou causest to be done , 
 that is thi mean to live . do thou but think 
 what 't is to cram a maw or cloth a back 
 from such a filthi vice ; say to thyself 
 'from their abomin and beastli touch 
 i drink , i eat , array myself , and live . ' 
 canst thou believ thi live is a life , 
 so stinkingli depend ? go mend , go mend . 
 pompey . inde , it doe stink in some sort , sir ; but yet , sir , 
 i would prove- 
 duke . nay , if the devil have given thee proof for sin , 
 thou wilt prove hi . take him to prison , offic ; 
 correct and instruct must both work 
 ere thi rude beast will profit . 
 elbow . he must befor the deputi , sir ; he ha given him warn . 
 the deputi can not abid a whoremast ; if he be a whoremong , 
 and come befor him , he were as good go a mile on hi errand . 
 duke . that we were all , as some would seem to be , 
 from our fault , as hi fault from seem , free . 
 elbow . hi neck will come to your waist- a cord , sir . 
 
 enter lucio 
 
 pompey . i spi comfort ; i cri bail . here 's a gentleman , and a friend 
 of mine . 
 lucio . how now , nobl pompey ! what , at the wheel of caesar ? art 
 thou led in triumph ? what , is there none of pygmalion 's imag , 
 newli made woman , to be had now for put the hand in the 
 pocket and extract it clutch 'd ? what repli , ha ? what say'st 
 thou to thi tune , matter , and method ? is't not drown 'd i ' th ' 
 last rain , ha ? what say'st thou , trot ? is the world as it wa , 
 man ? which is the way ? is it sad , and few word ? or how ? the 
 trick of it ? 
 duke . still thu , and thu ; still wors ! 
 lucio . how doth my dear morsel , thi mistress ? procur she still , 
 ha ? 
 pompey . troth , sir , she hath eaten up all her beef , and she is 
 herself in the tub . 
 lucio . whi , 't is good ; it is the right of it ; it must be so ; ever 
 your fresh whore and your powder 'd bawd- an unshunn 'd 
 consequ ; it must be so . art go to prison , pompey ? 
 pompey . ye , faith , sir . 
 lucio . whi , 't is not amiss , pompey . farewel ; go , say i sent thee 
 thither . for debt , pompey- or how ? 
 elbow . for be a bawd , for be a bawd . 
 lucio . well , then , imprison him . if imprison be the due of a 
 bawd , whi , 't is hi right . bawd is he doubtless , and of 
 antiqu , too ; bawd-born . farewel , good pompey . commend me to 
 the prison , pompey . you will turn good husband now , pompey ; you 
 will keep the hous . 
 pompey . i hope , sir , your good worship will be my bail . 
 lucio . no , inde , will i not , pompey ; it is not the wear . i will 
 pray , pompey , to increas your bondag . if you take it not 
 patient , whi , your mettl is the more . adieu trusti pompey . 
 bless you , friar . 
 duke . and you . 
 lucio . doe bridget paint still , pompey , ha ? 
 elbow . come your way , sir ; come . 
 pompey . you will not bail me then , sir ? 
 lucio . then , pompey , nor now . what news abroad , friar ? what news ? 
 elbow . come your way , sir ; come . 
 lucio . go to kennel , pompey , go . 
 
 exeunt elbow , pompey and offic 
 
 what news , friar , of the duke ? 
 duke . i know none . can you tell me of ani ? 
 lucio . some say he is with the emperor of russia ; other some , he is 
 in rome ; but where is he , think you ? 
 duke . i know not where ; but wheresoev , i wish him well . 
 lucio . it wa a mad fantast trick of him to steal from the 
 state and usurp the beggari he wa never born to . lord angelo 
 duke it well in hi absenc ; he put transgress to't . 
 duke . he doe well i n't . 
 lucio . a littl more leniti to lecheri would do no harm in him ; 
 someth too crab that way , friar . 
 duke . it is too gener a vice , and sever must cure it . 
 lucio . ye , in good sooth , the vice is of a great kindr ; it is 
 well alli ; but it is imposs to extirp it quit , friar , till 
 eat and drink be put down . they say thi angelo wa not 
 made by man and woman after thi downright way of creation . is it 
 true , think you ? 
 duke . how should he be made , then ? 
 lucio . some report a sea-maid spawn 'd him ; some , that he wa begot 
 between two stock-fish . but it is certain that when he make 
 water hi urin is congeal 'd ice ; that i know to be true . and he 
 is a motion gener ; that 's infal . 
 duke . you are pleasant , sir , and speak apac . 
 lucio . whi , what a ruthless thing is thi in him , for the rebellion 
 of a codpiec to take away the life of a man ! would the duke that 
 is absent have done thi ? ere he would have hang 'd a man for the 
 get a hundr bastard , he would have paid for the nurs a 
 thousand . he had some feel of the sport ; he knew the servic , 
 and that instruct him to merci . 
 duke . i never heard the absent duke much detect for women ; he wa 
 not inclin 'd that way . 
 lucio . o , sir , you are deceiv 'd . 
 duke . 't is not possibl . 
 lucio . who- not the duke ? ye , your beggar of fifti ; and hi use 
 wa to put a ducat in her clack-dish . the duke had crotchet in 
 him . he would be drunk too ; that let me inform you . 
 duke . you do him wrong , sure . 
 lucio . sir , i wa an inward of hi . a shi fellow wa the duke ; and 
 i believ i know the caus of hi withdraw . 
 duke . what , i prithe , might be the caus ? 
 lucio . no , pardon ; 't is a secret must be lock 'd within the teeth 
 and the lip ; but thi i can let you understand : the greater file 
 of the subject held the duke to be wise . 
 duke . wise ? whi , no question but he wa . 
 lucio . a veri superfici , ignor , unweigh fellow . 
 duke . either thi is envi in you , folli , or mistak ; the veri 
 stream of hi life , and the busi he hath helm , must , upon a 
 warrant need , give him a better proclam . let him be but 
 testimoni in hi own bringings-forth , and he shall appear to 
 the enviou a scholar , a statesman , and a soldier . therefor you 
 speak unskil ; or , if your knowledg be more , it is much 
 dark'n in your malic . 
 lucio . sir , i know him , and i love him . 
 duke . love talk with better knowledg , and knowledg with dearer 
 love . 
 lucio . come , sir , i know what i know . 
 duke . i can hardli believ that , sinc you know not what you speak . 
 but , if ever the duke return , as our prayer are he may , let me 
 desir you to make your answer befor him . if it be honest you 
 have spoke , you have courag to maintain it ; i am bound to call 
 upon you ; and i pray you your name ? 
 lucio . sir , my name is lucio , well known to the duke . 
 duke . he shall know you better , sir , if i may live to report you . 
 lucio . i fear you not . 
 duke . o , you hope the duke will return no more ; or you imagin me 
 too unhurt an opposit . but , inde , i can do you littl harm : 
 you 'll forswear thi again . 
 lucio . i 'll be hang 'd first . thou art deceiv 'd in me , friar . but no 
 more of thi . canst thou tell if claudio die to-morrow or no ? 
 duke . whi should he die , sir ? 
 lucio . whi ? for fill a bottl with a tun-dish . i would the duke 
 we talk of were return 'd again . thi ungenitur 'd agent will 
 unpeopl the provinc with contin ; sparrow must not build in 
 hi house-eav becaus they are lecher . the duke yet would 
 have dark deed darkli answer ; he would never bring them to 
 light . would he were return 'd ! marri , thi claudio is condemn 
 for untruss . farewel , good friar ; i prithe pray for me . the 
 duke , i say to thee again , would eat mutton on friday . he 's not 
 past it yet ; and , i say to thee , he would mouth with a beggar 
 though she smelt brown bread and garlic . say that i said so . 
 farewel . exit 
 duke . no might nor great in mortal 
 can censur scape ; back-wound calumni 
 the whitest virtu strike . what king so strong 
 can tie the gall up in the slander tongu ? 
 but who come here ? 
 
 enter escalu , provost , and offic with 
 mistress overdon 
 
 escalu . go , away with her to prison . 
 mrs. overdon . good my lord , be good to me ; your honour is 
 account a merci man ; good my lord . 
 escalu . doubl and trebl admonit , and still forfeit in the 
 same kind ! thi would make merci swear and play the tyrant . 
 provost . a bawd of eleven year ' continu , may it pleas your 
 honour . 
 mrs. overdon . my lord , thi is one lucio 's inform against me . 
 mistress kate keepdown wa with child by him in the duke 's time ; 
 he promi 'd her marriag . hi child is a year and a quarter old 
 come philip and jacob ; i have kept it myself ; and see how he goe 
 about to abus me . 
 escalu . that fellow is a fellow of much licens . let him be call 'd 
 befor us . away with her to prison . go to ; no more word . [ exeunt 
 offic with mistress overdon ] provost , my brother angelo will 
 not be alter 'd : claudio must die to-morrow . let him be furnish 'd 
 with divin , and have all charit prepar . if my brother 
 wrought by my piti , it should not be so with him . 
 provost . so pleas you , thi friar hath been with him , and advi 'd 
 him for th ' entertain of death . 
 escalu . good even , good father . 
 duke . bliss and good on you ! 
 escalu . of whenc are you ? 
 duke . not of thi countri , though my chanc is now 
 to use it for my time . i am a brother 
 of graciou order , late come from the see 
 in special busi from hi holi . 
 escalu . what news abroad i ' th ' world ? 
 duke . none , but that there is so great a fever on good that the 
 dissolut of it must cure it . novelti is onli in request ; and , 
 as it is , as danger to be age in ani kind of cours as it is 
 virtuou to be constant in ani undertak . there is scarc 
 truth enough aliv to make societi secur ; but secur enough 
 to make fellowship accurst . much upon thi riddl run the 
 wisdom of the world . thi news is old enough , yet it is everi 
 day 's news . i pray you , sir , of what disposit wa the duke ? 
 escalu . one that , abov all other strife , contend especi to 
 know himself . 
 duke . what pleasur wa he given to ? 
 escalu . rather rejoic to see anoth merri than merri at 
 anyth which profess 'd to make him rejoic ; a gentleman of all 
 temper . but leav we him to hi event , with a prayer they 
 may prove prosper ; and let me desir to know how you find 
 claudio prepar 'd . i am made to understand that you have lent him 
 visit . 
 duke . he profess to have receiv no sinist measur from hi 
 judg , but most willingli humbl himself to the determin of 
 justic . yet had he frame to himself , by the instruct of hi 
 frailti , mani deceiv promis of life ; which i , by my good 
 leisur , have discredit to him , and now he is resolv 'd to die . 
 escalu . you have paid the heaven your function , and the prison 
 the veri debt of your call . i have labour 'd for the poor 
 gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesti ; but my brother 
 justic have i found so sever that he hath forc 'd me to tell him 
 he is inde justic . 
 duke . if hi own life answer the strait of hi proceed , it 
 shall becom him well ; wherein if he chanc to fail , he hath 
 sentenc 'd himself . 
 escalu . i am go to visit the prison . fare you well . 
 duke . peac be with you ! exeunt escalu and provost 
 
 he who the sword of heaven will bear 
 should be as holi as sever ; 
 pattern in himself to know , 
 grace to stand , and virtu go ; 
 more nor less to other pay 
 than by self-off weigh . 
 shame to him whose cruel strike 
 kill for fault of hi own like ! 
 twice trebl shame on angelo , 
 to weed my vice and let hi grow ! 
 o , what may man within him hide , 
 though angel on the outward side ! 
 how may like , made in crime , 
 make a practic on the time , 
 to draw with idl spider ' string 
 most ponder and substanti thing ! 
 craft against vice i must appli . 
 with angelo to-night shall lie 
 hi old betroth but despis ; 
 so disguis shall , by th ' disguis , 
 pay with falsehood fals exact , 
 and perform an old contract . exit 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the moat grang at saint duke 's 
 
 enter mariana ; and boy sing 
 
 song 
 
 take , o , take those lip away , 
 that so sweetli were forsworn ; 
 and those eye , the break of day , 
 light that do mislead the morn ; 
 but my kiss bring again , bring again ; 
 seal of love , but seal 'd in vain , seal 'd in vain . 
 
 enter duke , disguis as befor 
 
 mariana . break off thi song , and hast thee quick away ; 
 here come a man of comfort , whose advic 
 hath often still 'd my brawl discont . exit boy 
 i cri you merci , sir , and well could wish 
 you had not found me here so music . 
 let me excus me , and believ me so , 
 my mirth it much displea 'd , but plea 'd my woe . 
 duke . 't is good ; though music oft hath such a charm 
 to make bad good and good provok to harm . 
 i pray you tell me hath anybodi inquir 'd for me here to-day . much 
 upon thi time have i promi 'd here to meet . 
 mariana . you have not been inquir 'd after ; i have sat here all day . 
 
 enter isabella 
 
 duke . i do constantli believ you . the time is come even now . i 
 shall crave your forbear a littl . may be i will call upon 
 you anon , for some advantag to yourself . 
 mariana . i am alway bound to you . exit 
 duke . veri well met , and well come . 
 what is the news from thi good deputi ? 
 isabella . he hath a garden circummur 'd with brick , 
 whose western side is with a vineyard back 'd ; 
 and to that vineyard is a planch gate 
 that make hi open with thi bigger key ; 
 thi other doth command a littl door 
 which from the vineyard to the garden lead . 
 there have i made my promis 
 upon the heavi middl of the night 
 to call upon him . 
 duke . but shall you on your knowledg find thi way ? 
 isabella . i have ta'en a due and wari note upo n't ; 
 with whisper and most guilti dilig , 
 in action all of precept , he did show me 
 the way twice o'er . 
 duke . are there no other token 
 between you 'greed concern her observ ? 
 isabella . no , none , but onli a repair i ' th ' dark ; 
 and that i have possess 'd him my most stay 
 can be but brief ; for i have made him know 
 i have a servant come with me along , 
 that stay upon me ; whose persuas is 
 i come about my brother . 
 duke . 't is well born up . 
 i have not yet made known to mariana 
 a word of thi . what ho , within ! come forth . 
 
 re-ent mariana 
 
 i pray you be acquaint with thi maid ; 
 she come to do you good . 
 isabella . i do desir the like . 
 duke . do you persuad yourself that i respect you ? 
 mariana . good friar , i know you do , and have found it . 
 duke . take , then , thi your companion by the hand , 
 who hath a stori readi for your ear . 
 i shall attend your leisur ; but make hast ; 
 the vapor night approach . 
 mariana . will't pleas you walk asid ? 
 exeunt mariana and isabella 
 duke . o place and great ! million of fals eye 
 are stuck upon thee . volum of report 
 run with these fals , and most contrari quest 
 upon thi do . thousand escap of wit 
 make thee the father of their idl dream , 
 and rack thee in their fanci . 
 
 re-ent mariana and isabella 
 
 welcom , how agre ? 
 isabella . she 'll take the enterpris upon her , father , 
 if you advis it . 
 duke . it is not my consent , 
 but my entreati too . 
 isabella . littl have you to say , 
 when you depart from him , but , soft and low , 
 'rememb now my brother . ' 
 mariana . fear me not . 
 duke . nor , gentl daughter , fear you not at all . 
 he is your husband on a pre-contract . 
 to bring you thu togeth 't is no sin , 
 sith that the justic of your titl to him 
 doth flourish the deceit . come , let us go ; 
 our corn 's to reap , for yet our tith 's to sow . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the prison 
 
 enter provost and pompey 
 
 provost . come hither , sirrah . can you cut off a man 's head ? 
 pompey . if the man be a bachelor , sir , i can ; but if he be a 
 marri man , he 's hi wife 's head , and i can never cut of a 
 woman 's head . 
 provost . come , sir , leav me your snatch and yield me a direct 
 answer . to-morrow morn are to die claudio and barnardin . here 
 is in our prison a common execution , who in hi offic lack a 
 helper ; if you will take it on you to assist him , it shall redeem 
 you from your gyve ; if not , you shall have your full time of 
 imprison , and your deliver with an unpiti whip , for 
 you have been a notori bawd . 
 pompey . sir , i have been an unlaw bawd time out of mind ; but yet 
 i will be content to be a law hangman . i would be glad to 
 receiv some instruct from my fellow partner . 
 provost . what ho , abhorson ! where 's abhorson there ? 
 
 enter abhorson 
 
 abhorson . do you call , sir ? 
 provost . sirrah , here 's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your 
 execut . if you think it meet , compound with him by the year , 
 and let him abid here with you ; if not , use him for the present , 
 and dismiss him . he can not plead hi estim with you ; he hath 
 been a bawd . 
 abhorson . a bawd , sir ? fie upon him ! he will discredit our mysteri . 
 provost . go to , sir ; you weigh equal ; a feather will turn the 
 scale . exit 
 pompey . pray , sir , by your good favour- for sure , sir , a good 
 favour you have but that you have a hang look- do you call , 
 sir , your occup a mysteri ? 
 abhorson . ay , sir ; a mysteri . 
 pompey . paint , sir , i have heard say , is a mysteri ; and your 
 whore , sir , be member of my occup , use paint , do 
 prove my occup a mysteri ; but what mysteri there should be 
 in hang , if i should be hang 'd , i can not imagin . 
 abhorson . sir , it is a mysteri . 
 pompey . proof ? 
 abhorson . everi true man 's apparel fit your thief : if it be too 
 littl for your thief , your true man think it big enough ; if it 
 be too big for your thief , your thief think it littl enough ; so 
 everi true man 's apparel fit your thief . 
 
 re-ent provost 
 
 provost . are you agre ? 
 pompey . sir , i will serv him ; for i do find your hangman is a more 
 penit trade than your bawd ; he doth often ask forgiv . 
 provost . you , sirrah , provid your block and your axe to-morrow 
 four o'clock . 
 abhorson . come on , bawd ; i will instruct thee in my trade ; follow . 
 pompey . i do desir to learn , sir ; and i hope , if you have occas 
 to use me for your own turn , you shall find me yare ; for truli , 
 sir , for your kind i owe you a good turn . 
 provost . call hither barnardin and claudio . 
 exeunt abhorson and pompey 
 th ' one ha my piti ; not a jot the other , 
 be a murder , though he were my brother . 
 
 enter claudio 
 
 look , here 's the warrant , claudio , for thi death ; 
 't is now dead midnight , and by eight to-morrow 
 thou must be made immort . where 's barnardin ? 
 claudio . as fast lock 'd up in sleep as guiltless labour 
 when it lie starkli in the travel 's bone . 
 he will not wake . 
 provost . who can do good on him ? 
 well , go , prepar yourself . [ knock within ] but hark , what 
 nois ? 
 heaven give your spirit comfort ! exit claudio 
 [ knock continu ] by and by . 
 i hope it is some pardon or repriev 
 for the most gentl claudio . 
 
 enter duke , disguis as befor 
 
 welcom , father . 
 duke . the best and wholesom'st spirit of the night 
 envelop you , good provost ! who call 'd here of late ? 
 provost . none , sinc the curfew rung . 
 duke . not isabel ? 
 provost . no . 
 duke . they will then , ere't be long . 
 provost . what comfort is for claudio ? 
 duke . there 's some in hope . 
 provost . it is a bitter deputi . 
 duke . not so , not so ; hi life is parallel 'd 
 even with the stroke and line of hi great justic ; 
 he doth with holi abstin subdu 
 that in himself which he spur on hi pow ' r 
 to qualifi in other . were he meal 'd with that 
 which he correct , then were he tyrann ; 
 but thi be so , he 's just . [ knock within ] now are they 
 come . exit provost 
 thi is a gentl provost ; seldom when 
 the steel gaoler is the friend of men . [ knock within ] 
 how now , what nois ! that spirit 's possess 'd with hast 
 that wound th ' unsist postern with these stroke . 
 
 re-ent provost 
 
 provost . there he must stay until the offic 
 aris to let him in ; he is call 'd up . 
 duke . have you no countermand for claudio yet 
 but he must die to-morrow ? 
 provost . none , sir , none . 
 duke . as near the dawn , provost , as it is , 
 you shall hear more ere morn . 
 provost . happili 
 you someth know ; yet i believ there come 
 no countermand ; no such exampl have we . 
 besid , upon the veri sieg of justic , 
 lord angelo hath to the public ear 
 profess 'd the contrari . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 thi is hi lordship 's man . 
 duke . and here come claudio 's pardon . 
 messeng . my lord hath sent you thi note ; and by me thi further 
 charg , that you swerv not from the smallest articl of it , 
 neither in time , matter , or other circumst . good morrow ; for 
 as i take it , it is almost day . 
 provost . i shall obey him . exit messeng 
 duke . [ asid ] thi is hi pardon , purcha 'd by such sin 
 for which the pardon himself is in ; 
 henc hath offenc hi quick celer , 
 when it is born in high author . 
 when vice make merci , merci 's so extend 
 that for the fault 's love is th ' offend friend . 
 now , sir , what news ? 
 provost . i told you : lord angelo , belik think me remiss in mine 
 offic , awaken me with thi unwont putting-on ; methink 
 strang , for he hath not us 'd it befor . 
 duke . pray you , let 's hear . 
 provost . [ read ] 'whatsoev you may hear to the contrari , let 
 claudio be execut by four of the clock , and , in the afternoon , 
 barnardin . for my better satisfact , let me have claudio 's 
 head sent me by five . let thi be duli perform , with a thought 
 that more depend on it than we must yet deliv . thu fail not 
 to do your offic , as you will answer it at your peril . ' 
 what say you to thi , sir ? 
 duke . what is that barnardin who is to be execut in th ' 
 afternoon ? 
 provost . a bohemian born ; but here nur 'd up and bred . 
 one that is a prison nine year old . 
 duke . how came it that the absent duke had not either deliv 'd him 
 to hi liberti or execut him ? i have heard it wa ever hi 
 manner to do so . 
 provost . hi friend still wrought repriev for him ; and , inde , 
 hi fact , till now in the govern of lord angelo , came not to 
 an undoubt proof . 
 duke . it is now appar ? 
 provost . most manifest , and not deni by himself . 
 duke . hath he born himself penit in prison ? how seem he to 
 be touch 'd ? 
 provost . a man that apprehend death no more dread but as a 
 drunken sleep ; careless , reckless , and fearless , of what 's past , 
 present , or to come ; insens of mortal and desper 
 mortal . 
 duke . he want advic . 
 provost . he will hear none . he hath evermor had the liberti of the 
 prison ; give him leav to escap henc , he would not ; drunk mani 
 time a day , if not mani day entir drunk . we have veri oft 
 awak 'd him , as if to carri him to execut , and show 'd him a 
 seem warrant for it ; it hath not move him at all . 
 duke . more of him anon . there is written in your brow , provost , 
 honesti and constanc . if i read it not truli , my ancient skill 
 beguil me ; but in the bold of my cun i will lay myself 
 in hazard . claudio , whom here you have warrant to execut , is no 
 greater forfeit to the law than angelo who hath sentenc 'd him . to 
 make you understand thi in a manifest effect , i crave but four 
 day ' respit ; for the which you are to do me both a present and 
 a danger courtesi . 
 provost . pray , sir , in what ? 
 duke . in the delay death . 
 provost . alack ! how may i do it , have the hour limit , and an 
 express command , under penalti , to deliv hi head in the view 
 of angelo ? i may make my case as claudio 's , to cross thi in the 
 smallest . 
 duke . by the vow of mine order , i warrant you , if my instruct 
 may be your guid . let thi barnardin be thi morn execut , 
 and hi head born to angelo . 
 provost . angelo hath seen them both , and will discov the favour . 
 duke . o , death 's a great disguis ; and you may add to it . shave 
 the head and tie the beard ; and say it wa the desir of the 
 penit to be so bar 'd befor hi death . you know the cours is 
 common . if anyth fall to you upon thi more than thank and 
 good fortun , by the saint whom i profess , i will plead against 
 it with my life . 
 provost . pardon me , good father ; it is against my oath . 
 duke . were you sworn to the duke , or to the deputi ? 
 provost . to him and to hi substitut . 
 duke . you will think you have made no offenc if the duke avouch 
 the justic of your deal ? 
 provost . but what likelihood is in that ? 
 duke . not a resembl , but a certainti . yet sinc i see you 
 fear , that neither my coat , integr , nor persuas , can 
 with eas attempt you , i will go further than i meant , to pluck 
 all fear out of you . look you , sir , here is the hand and seal of 
 the duke . you know the charact , i doubt not ; and the signet is 
 not strang to you . 
 provost . i know them both . 
 duke . the content of thi is the return of the duke ; you shall 
 anon over-read it at your pleasur , where you shall find within 
 these two day he will be here . thi is a thing that angelo know 
 not ; for he thi veri day receiv letter of strang tenour , 
 perchanc of the duke 's death , perchanc enter into some 
 monasteri ; but , by chanc , noth of what is writ . look , th ' 
 unfold star call up the shepherd . put not yourself into 
 amaz how these thing should be : all difficulti are but 
 easi when they are known . call your execution , and off with 
 barnardin 's head . i will give him a present shrift , and advis 
 him for a better place . yet you are amaz 'd , but thi shall 
 absolut resolv you . come away ; it is almost clear dawn . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the prison 
 
 enter pompey 
 
 pompey . i am as well acquaint here as i wa in our hous of 
 profess ; one would think it were mistress overdon 's own 
 hous , for here be mani of her old custom . first , here 's young 
 master rash ; he 's in for a commod of brown paper and old 
 ginger , nine score and seventeen pound , of which he made five 
 mark readi money . marri , then ginger wa not much in request , 
 for the old women were all dead . then is there here one master 
 caper , at the suit of master threepil the mercer , for some four 
 suit of peach-colour 'd satin , which now peach him a beggar . 
 then have we here young dizi , and young master deepvow , and 
 master copperspur , and master starvelackey , the rapier and dagger 
 man , and young dropheir that kill 'd lusti pud , and master 
 forthlight the tilter , and brave master shooti the great 
 travel , and wild halfcan that stabb 'd pot , and , i think , 
 forti more- all great doer in our trade , and are now 'for the 
 lord 's sake . ' 
 
 enter abhorson 
 
 abhorson . sirrah , bring barnardin hither . 
 pompey . master barnardin ! you must rise and be hang 'd , master 
 barnardin ! 
 abhorson . what ho , barnardin ! 
 barnardin . [ within ] a pox o ' your throat ! who make that nois 
 there ? what are you ? 
 pompey . your friend , sir ; the hangman . you must be so good , sir , 
 to rise and be put to death . 
 barnardin . [ within ] away , you rogu , away ; i am sleepi . 
 abhorson . tell him he must awak , and that quickli too . 
 pompey . pray , master barnardin , awak till you are execut , and 
 sleep afterward . 
 abhorson . go in to him , and fetch him out . 
 pompey . he is come , sir , he is come ; i hear hi straw rustl . 
 
 enter barnardin 
 
 abhorson . is the axe upon the block , sirrah ? 
 pompey . veri readi , sir . 
 barnardin . how now , abhorson , what 's the news with you ? 
 abhorson . truli , sir , i would desir you to clap into your prayer ; 
 for , look you , the warrant 's come . 
 barnardin . you rogu , i have been drink all night ; i am not 
 fit for't . 
 pompey . o , the better , sir ! for he that drink all night and is 
 hang betim in the morn may sleep the sounder all the next 
 day . 
 
 enter duke , disguis as befor 
 
 abhorson . look you , sir , here come your ghostli father . 
 do we jest now , think you ? 
 duke . sir , induc by my chariti , and hear how hastili you are 
 to depart , i am come to advis you , comfort you , and pray with 
 you . 
 barnardin . friar , not i ; i have been drink hard all night , and 
 i will have more time to prepar me , or they shall beat out my 
 brain with billet . i will not consent to die thi day , that 's 
 certain . 
 duke . o , sir , you must ; and therefor i beseech you 
 look forward on the journey you shall go . 
 barnardin . i swear i will not die to-day for ani man 's persuas . 
 duke . but hear you- 
 barnardin . not a word ; if you have anyth to say to me , come to 
 my ward ; for thenc will not i to-day . exit 
 duke . unfit to live or die . o gravel heart ! 
 after him , fellow ; bring him to the block . 
 exeunt abhorson and pompey 
 
 enter provost 
 
 provost . now , sir , how do you find the prison ? 
 duke . a creatur unprepar 'd , unmeet for death ; 
 and to transport him in the mind he is 
 were damnabl . 
 provost . here in the prison , father , 
 there die thi morn of a cruel fever 
 one ragozin , a most notori pirat , 
 a man of claudio 's year ; hi beard and head 
 just of hi colour . what if we do omit 
 thi reprob till he were well inclin 'd , 
 and satisfi the deputi with the visag 
 of ragozin , more like to claudio ? 
 duke . o , 't is an accid that heaven provid ! 
 dispatch it present ; the hour draw on 
 prefix 'd by angelo . see thi be done , 
 and sent accord to command ; while i 
 persuad thi rude wretch willingli to die . 
 provost . thi shall be done , good father , present . 
 but barnardin must die thi afternoon ; 
 and how shall we continu claudio , 
 to save me from the danger that might come 
 if he were known aliv ? 
 duke . let thi be done : 
 put them in secret hold , both barnardin and claudio . 
 ere twice the sun hath made hi journal greet 
 to the under gener , you shall find 
 your safeti manifest . 
 provost . i am your free depend . 
 duke . quick , dispatch , and send the head to angelo . 
 exit provost 
 now will i write letter to angelo- 
 the provost , he shall bear them- whose content 
 shall wit to him i am near at home , 
 and that , by great injunct , i am bound 
 to enter publicli . him i 'll desir 
 to meet me at the consecr fount , 
 a leagu below the citi ; and from thenc , 
 by cold gradat and well-balanc 'd form . 
 we shall proceed with angelo . 
 
 re-ent provost 
 
 provost . here is the head ; i 'll carri it myself . 
 duke . conveni is it . make a swift return ; 
 for i would commun with you of such thing 
 that want no ear but your . 
 provost . i 'll make all speed . exit 
 isabella . [ within ] peac , ho , be here ! 
 duke . the tongu of isabel . she 's come to know 
 if yet her brother 's pardon be come hither ; 
 but i will keep her ignor of her good , 
 to make her heavenli comfort of despair 
 when it is least expect . 
 
 enter isabella 
 
 isabella . ho , by your leav ! 
 duke . good morn to you , fair and graciou daughter . 
 isabella . the better , given me by so holi a man . 
 hath yet the deputi sent my brother 's pardon ? 
 duke . he hath relea 'd him , isabel , from the world . 
 hi head is off and sent to angelo . 
 isabella . nay , but it is not so . 
 duke . it is no other . 
 show your wisdom , daughter , in your close patienc , 
 isabella . o , i will to him and pluck out hi eye ! 
 duke . you shall not be admit to hi sight . 
 isabella . unhappi claudio ! wretch isabel ! 
 injuri world ! most damn angelo ! 
 duke . thi nor hurt him nor profit you a jot ; 
 forbear it , therefor ; give your caus to heaven . 
 mark what i say , which you shall find 
 by everi syllabl a faith veriti . 
 the duke come home to-morrow . nay , dri your eye . 
 one of our covent , and hi confessor , 
 give me thi instanc . alreadi he hath carri 
 notic to escalu and angelo , 
 who do prepar to meet him at the gate , 
 there to give up their pow ' r . if you can , pace your wisdom 
 in that good path that i would wish it go , 
 and you shall have your bosom on thi wretch , 
 grace of the duke , reveng to your heart , 
 and gener honour . 
 isabella . i am direct by you . 
 duke . thi letter , then , to friar peter give ; 
 't is that he sent me of the duke 's return . 
 say , by thi token , i desir hi compani 
 at mariana 's hous to-night . her caus and your 
 i 'll perfect him withal ; and he shall bring you 
 befor the duke ; and to the head of angelo 
 accus him home and home . for my poor self , 
 i am combin by a sacr vow , 
 and shall be absent . wend you with thi letter . 
 command these fret water from your eye 
 with a light heart ; trust not my holi order , 
 if i pervert your cours . who 's here ? 
 
 enter lucio 
 
 lucio . good even . friar , where 's the provost ? 
 duke . not within , sir . 
 lucio . o pretti isabella , i am pale at mine heart to see thine eye 
 so red . thou must be patient . i am fain to dine and sup with 
 water and bran ; i dare not for my head fill my belli ; one 
 fruit meal would set me to't . but they say the duke will be 
 here to-morrow . by my troth , isabel , i lov 'd thi brother . if the 
 old fantast duke of dark corner had been at home , he had 
 live . exit isabella 
 duke . sir , the duke is marvel littl behold to your report ; 
 but the best is , he live not in them . 
 lucio . friar , thou knowest not the duke so well as i do ; he 's a 
 better woodman than thou tak'st him for . 
 duke . well , you 'll answer thi one day . fare ye well . 
 lucio . nay , tarri ; i 'll go along with thee ; i can tell thee pretti 
 tale of the duke . 
 duke . you have told me too mani of him alreadi , sir , if they be 
 true ; if not true , none were enough . 
 lucio . i wa onc befor him for get a wench with child . 
 duke . did you such a thing ? 
 lucio . ye , marri , did i ; but i wa fain to forswear it : they would 
 els have marri me to the rotten medlar . 
 duke . sir , your compani is fairer than honest . rest you well . 
 lucio . by my troth , i 'll go with thee to the lane 's end . if bawdi 
 talk offend you , we 'll have veri littl of it . nay , friar , i am a 
 kind of burr ; i shall stick . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 angelo 's hous 
 
 enter angelo and escalu 
 
 escalu . everi letter he hath writ hath disvouch 'd other . 
 angelo . in most uneven and distract manner . hi action show much 
 like to mad ; pray heaven hi wisdom be not taint ! and whi 
 meet him at the gate , and redeliv our author there ? 
 escalu . i guess not . 
 angelo . and whi should we proclaim it in an hour befor hi 
 ent'r that , if ani crave redress of injustic , they should 
 exhibit their petit in the street ? 
 escalu . he show hi reason for that : to have a dispatch of 
 complaint ; and to deliv us from devic hereaft , which 
 shall then have no power to stand against us . 
 angelo . well , i beseech you , let it be proclaim 'd ; 
 betim i ' th ' morn i 'll call you at your hous ; 
 give notic to such men of sort and suit 
 as are to meet him . 
 escalu . i shall , sir ; fare you well . 
 angelo . good night . exit escalu 
 thi deed unshap me quit , make me unpregn 
 and dull to all proceed . a deflow'r maid ! 
 and by an emin bodi that enforc 'd 
 the law against it ! but that her tender shame 
 will not proclaim against her maiden loss , 
 how might she tongu me ! yet reason dare her no ; 
 for my author bear a so credent bulk 
 that no particular scandal onc can touch 
 but it confound the breather . he should have liv 'd , 
 save that hi riotou youth , with danger sens , 
 might in the time to come have ta'en reveng , 
 by so receiv a dishonour 'd life 
 with ransom of such shame . would yet he had liv 'd ! 
 alack , when onc our grace we have forgot , 
 noth goe right ; we would , and we would not . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 field without the town 
 
 enter duke in hi own habit , and friar peter 
 
 duke . these letter at fit time deliv me . [ give letter ] 
 the provost know our purpos and our plot . 
 the matter be afoot , keep your instruct 
 and hold you ever to our special drift ; 
 though sometim you do blench from thi to that 
 as caus doth minist . go , call at flaviu ' hous , 
 and tell him where i stay ; give the like notic 
 to valentinu , rowland , and to crassu , 
 and bid them bring the trumpet to the gate ; 
 but send me flaviu first . 
 peter . it shall be speed well . exit friar 
 
 enter varriu 
 
 duke . i thank thee , varriu ; thou hast made good hast . 
 come , we will walk . there 's other of our friend 
 will greet us here anon . my gentl varriu ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 a street near the citi gate 
 
 enter isabella and mariana 
 
 isabella . to speak so indirectli i am loath ; 
 i would say the truth ; but to accus him so , 
 that is your part . yet i am advi 'd to do it ; 
 he say , to veil full purpos . 
 mariana . be rul 'd by him . 
 isabella . besid , he tell me that , if peradventur 
 he speak against me on the advers side , 
 i should not think it strang ; for 't is a physic 
 that 's bitter to sweet end . 
 mariana . i would friar peter- 
 
 enter friar peter 
 
 isabella . o , peac ! the friar is come . 
 peter . come , i have found you out a stand most fit , 
 where you may have such vantag on the duke 
 he shall not pass you . twice have the trumpet sound ; 
 the gener and gravest citizen 
 have hent the gate , and veri near upon 
 the duke is ent'r ; therefor , henc , away . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the citi gate 
 
 enter at sever door duke , varriu , lord ; angelo , escalu , lucio , 
 provost , offic , and citizen 
 
 duke . my veri worthi cousin , fairli met ! 
 our old and faith friend , we are glad to see you . 
 angelo , escalu . happi return be to your royal grace ! 
 duke . mani and hearti thank to you both . 
 we have made inquiri of you , and we hear 
 such good of your justic that our soul 
 can not but yield you forth to public thank , 
 forerun more requit . 
 angelo . you make my bond still greater . 
 duke . o , your desert speak loud ; and i should wrong it 
 to lock it in the ward of covert bosom , 
 when it deserv , with charact of brass , 
 a fort resid 'gainst the tooth of time 
 and razur of oblivion . give me your hand . 
 and let the subject see , to make them know 
 that outward courtesi would fain proclaim 
 favour that keep within . come , escalu , 
 you must walk by us on our other hand , 
 and good support are you . 
 
 enter friar peter and isabella 
 
 peter . now is your time ; speak loud , and kneel befor him . 
 isabella . justic , o royal duke ! vail your regard 
 upon a wrong'd- i would fain have said a maid ! 
 o worthi princ , dishonour not your eye 
 by throw it on ani other object 
 till you have heard me in my true complaint , 
 and given me justic , justic , justic , justic . 
 duke . relat your wrong . in what ? by whom ? be brief . 
 here is lord angelo shall give you justic ; 
 reveal yourself to him . 
 isabella . o worthi duke , 
 you bid me seek redempt of the devil ! 
 hear me yourself ; for that which i must speak 
 must either punish me , not be believ 'd , 
 or wring redress from you . hear me , o , hear me , here ! 
 angelo . my lord , her wit , i fear me , are not firm ; 
 she hath been a suitor to me for her brother , 
 cut off by cours of justice- 
 isabella . by cours of justic ! 
 angelo . and she will speak most bitterli and strang . 
 isabella . most strang , but yet most truli , will i speak . 
 that angelo 's forsworn , is it not strang ? 
 that angelo 's a murder , is't not strang ? 
 that angelo is an adulter thief , 
 an hypocrit , a virgin-viol , 
 is it not strang and strang ? 
 duke . nay , it is ten time strang . 
 isabella . it is not truer he is angelo 
 than thi is all as true as it is strang ; 
 nay , it is ten time true ; for truth is truth 
 to th ' end of reck'n . 
 duke . away with her . poor soul , 
 she speak thi in th ' infirm of sens . 
 isabella . o princ ! i conjur thee , as thou believ'st 
 there is anoth comfort than thi world , 
 that thou neglect me not with that opinion 
 that i am touch 'd with mad . make not imposs 
 that which but seem unlik : 't is not imposs 
 but one , the wicked'st caitiff on the ground , 
 may seem as shi , as grave , as just , as absolut , 
 as angelo ; even so may angelo , 
 in all hi dress , charact , titl , form , 
 be an arch-villain . believ it , royal princ , 
 if he be less , he 's noth ; but he 's more , 
 had i more name for bad . 
 duke . by mine honesti , 
 if she be mad , as i believ no other , 
 her mad hath the oddest frame of sens , 
 such a depend of thing on thing , 
 as e'er i heard in mad . 
 isabella . o graciou duke , 
 harp not on that ; nor do not banish reason 
 for inequ ; but let your reason serv 
 to make the truth appear where it seem hid , 
 and hide the fals seem true . 
 duke . mani that are not mad 
 have , sure , more lack of reason . what would you say ? 
 isabella . i am the sister of one claudio , 
 condemn 'd upon the act of fornic 
 to lose hi head ; condemn 'd by angelo . 
 i , in probat of a sisterhood , 
 wa sent to by my brother ; one lucio 
 as then the messenger- 
 lucio . that 's i , a n't like your grace . 
 i came to her from claudio , and desir 'd her 
 to tri her graciou fortun with lord angelo 
 for her poor brother 's pardon . 
 isabella . that 's he , inde . 
 duke . you were not bid to speak . 
 lucio . no , my good lord ; 
 nor wish 'd to hold my peac . 
 duke . i wish you now , then ; 
 pray you take note of it ; and when you have 
 a busi for yourself , pray heaven you then 
 be perfect . 
 lucio . i warrant your honour . 
 duke . the warrant 's for yourself ; take heed to't . 
 isabella . thi gentleman told somewhat of my tale . 
 lucio . right . 
 duke . it may be right ; but you are i ' the wrong 
 to speak befor your time . proceed . 
 isabella . i went 
 to thi pernici caitiff deputi . 
 duke . that 's somewhat madli spoken . 
 isabella . pardon it ; 
 the phrase is to the matter . 
 duke . mend again . the matter- proceed . 
 isabella . in brief- to set the needless process by , 
 how i persuad , how i pray 'd , and kneel 'd , 
 how he refel 'd me , and how i repli , 
 for thi wa of much length- the vile conclus 
 i now begin with grief and shame to utter : 
 he would not , but by gift of my chast bodi 
 to hi concupisc intemper lust , 
 releas my brother ; and , after much debat , 
 my sisterli remors confut mine honour , 
 and i did yield to him . but the next morn betim , 
 hi purpos surfeit , he send a warrant 
 for my poor brother 's head . 
 duke . thi is most like ! 
 isabella . o that it were as like as it is true ! 
 duke . by heaven , fond wretch , thou know'st not what thou speak'st , 
 or els thou art suborn 'd against hi honour 
 in hate practic . first , hi integr 
 stand without blemish ; next , it import no reason 
 that with such vehem he should pursu 
 fault proper to himself . if he had so offend , 
 he would have weigh 'd thi brother by himself , 
 and not have cut him off . some one hath set you on ; 
 confess the truth , and say by whose advic 
 thou cam'st here to complain . 
 isabella . and is thi all ? 
 then , o you bless minist abov , 
 keep me in patienc ; and , with ripen time , 
 unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
 in counten ! heaven shield your grace from woe , 
 as i , thu wrong 'd , henc unbeliev go ! 
 duke . i know you 'd fain be gone . an offic ! 
 to prison with her ! shall we thu permit 
 a blast and a scandal breath to fall 
 on him so near us ? thi need must be a practic . 
 who knew of your intent and come hither ? 
 isabella . one that i would were here , friar lodowick . 
 duke . a ghostli father , belik . who know that lodowick ? 
 lucio . my lord , i know him ; 't is a meddl friar . 
 i do not like the man ; had he been lay , my lord , 
 for certain word he spake against your grace 
 in your retir , i had swing 'd him soundli . 
 duke . word against me ? thi 's a good friar , belik ! 
 and to set on thi wretch woman here 
 against our substitut ! let thi friar be found . 
 lucio . but yesternight , my lord , she and that friar , 
 i saw them at the prison ; a sauci friar , 
 a veri scurvi fellow . 
 peter . bless be your royal grace ! 
 i have stood by , my lord , and i have heard 
 your royal ear abu 'd . first , hath thi woman 
 most wrong accu 'd your substitut ; 
 who is as free from touch or soil with her 
 as she from one ungot . 
 duke . we did believ no less . 
 know you that friar lodowick that she speak of ? 
 peter . i know him for a man divin and holi ; 
 not scurvi , nor a temporari meddler , 
 as he 's report by thi gentleman ; 
 and , on my trust , a man that never yet 
 did , as he vouch , misreport your grace . 
 lucio . my lord , most villain ; believ it . 
 peter . well , he in time may come to clear himself ; 
 but at thi instant he is sick , my lord , 
 of a strang fever . upon hi mere request- 
 be come to knowledg that there wa complaint 
 intend 'gainst lord angelo- came i hither 
 to speak , as from hi mouth , what he doth know 
 is true and fals ; and what he , with hi oath 
 and all probat , will make up full clear , 
 whensoev he 's convent . first , for thi woman- 
 to justifi thi worthi nobleman , 
 so vulgarli and person accus'd- 
 her shall you hear disprov to her eye , 
 till she herself confess it . 
 duke . good friar , let 's hear it . exit isabella guard 
 do you not smile at thi , lord angelo ? 
 o heaven , the vaniti of wretch fool ! 
 give us some seat . come , cousin angelo ; 
 in thi i 'll be imparti ; be you judg 
 of your own caus . 
 
 enter mariana veil 
 
 is thi the wit , friar ? 
 first let her show her face , and after speak . 
 mariana . pardon , my lord ; i will not show my face 
 until my husband bid me . 
 duke . what , are you marri ? 
 mariana . no , my lord . 
 duke . are you a maid ? 
 mariana . no , my lord . 
 duke . a widow , then ? 
 mariana . neither , my lord . 
 duke . whi , you are noth then ; neither maid , widow , nor wife . 
 lucio . my lord , she may be a punk ; for mani of them are neither 
 maid , widow , nor wife . 
 duke . silenc that fellow . i would he had some caus 
 to prattl for himself . 
 lucio . well , my lord . 
 mariana . my lord , i do confess i ne'er wa marri , 
 and i confess , besid , i am no maid . 
 i have known my husband ; yet my husband 
 know not that ever he knew me . 
 lucio . he wa drunk , then , my lord ; it can be no better . 
 duke . for the benefit of silenc , would thou wert so too ! 
 lucio . well , my lord . 
 duke . thi is no wit for lord angelo . 
 mariana . now i come to't , my lord : 
 she that accus him of fornic , 
 in self-sam manner doth accus my husband ; 
 and charg him , my lord , with such a time 
 when i 'll depos i had him in mine arm , 
 with all th ' effect of love . 
 angelo . charg she moe than me ? 
 mariana . not that i know . 
 duke . no ? you say your husband . 
 mariana . whi , just , my lord , and that is angelo , 
 who think he know that he ne'er knew my bodi , 
 but know he think that he know isabel 's . 
 angelo . thi is a strang abus . let 's see thi face . 
 mariana . my husband bid me ; now i will unmask . 
 [ unveil ] 
 thi is that face , thou cruel angelo , 
 which onc thou swor'st wa worth the look on ; 
 thi is the hand which , with a vow 'd contract , 
 wa fast belock 'd in thine ; thi is the bodi 
 that took away the match from isabel , 
 and did suppli thee at thi garden-hous 
 in her imagin 'd person . 
 duke . know you thi woman ? 
 lucio . carnal , she say . 
 duke . sirrah , no more . 
 lucio . enough , my lord . 
 angelo . my lord , i must confess i know thi woman ; 
 and five year sinc there wa some speech of marriag 
 betwixt myself and her ; which wa broke off , 
 partli for that her promis proport 
 came short of composit ; but in chief 
 for that her reput wa disvalu 
 in leviti . sinc which time of five year 
 i never spake with her , saw her , nor heard from her , 
 upon my faith and honour . 
 mariana . nobl princ , 
 as there come light from heaven and word from breath , 
 as there is sens in truth and truth in virtu , 
 i am affianc 'd thi man 's wife as strongli 
 as word could make up vow . and , my good lord , 
 but tuesday night last gone , in 's garden-hous , 
 he knew me as a wife . as thi is true , 
 let me in safeti rais me from my knee , 
 or els for ever be confix here , 
 a marbl monument ! 
 angelo . i did but smile till now . 
 now , good my lord , give me the scope of justic ; 
 my patienc here is touch 'd . i do perceiv 
 these poor inform women are no more 
 but instrument of some more mightier member 
 that set them on . let me have way , my lord , 
 to find thi practic out . 
 duke . ay , with my heart ; 
 and punish them to your height of pleasur . 
 thou foolish friar , and thou pernici woman , 
 compact with her that 's gone , think'st thou thi oath , 
 though they would swear down each particular saint , 
 were testimoni against hi worth and credit , 
 that 's seal 'd in approb ? you , lord escalu , 
 sit with my cousin ; lend him your kind pain 
 to find out thi abus , whenc 't is deriv 'd . 
 there is anoth friar that set them on ; 
 let him be sent for . 
 peter . would lie were here , my lord ! for he inde 
 hath set the women on to thi complaint . 
 your provost know the place where he abid , 
 and he may fetch him . 
 duke . go , do it instantli . exit provost 
 and you , my nobl and well-warr cousin , 
 whom it concern to hear thi matter forth , 
 do with your injuri as seem you best 
 in ani chastis . i for a while will leav you ; 
 but stir not you till you have well determin 'd 
 upon these slander . 
 escalu . my lord , we 'll do it throughli . exit duke 
 signior lucio , did not you say you knew that friar lodowick to be 
 a dishonest person ? 
 lucio . 'cucullu non facit monachum ' : honest in noth but in hi 
 cloth ; and one that hath spoke most villain speech of the 
 duke . 
 escalu . we shall entreat you to abid here till he come and 
 enforc them against him . we shall find thi friar a notabl 
 fellow . 
 lucio . as ani in vienna , on my word . 
 escalu . call that same isabel here onc again ; i would speak with 
 her . [ exit an attend ] pray you , my lord , give me leav to 
 question ; you shall see how i 'll handl her . 
 lucio . not better than he , by her own report . 
 escalu . say you ? 
 lucio . marri , sir , i think , if you handl her privat , she would 
 sooner confess ; perchanc , publicli , she 'll be asham 'd . 
 
 re-ent offic with isabella ; and provost with the 
 duke in hi friar 's habit 
 
 escalu . i will go darkli to work with her . 
 lucio . that 's the way ; for women are light at midnight . 
 escalu . come on , mistress ; here 's a gentlewoman deni all that 
 you have said . 
 lucio . my lord , here come the rascal i spoke of , here with the 
 provost . 
 escalu . in veri good time . speak not you to him till we call upon 
 you . 
 lucio . mum . 
 escalu . come , sir ; did you set these women on to slander lord 
 angelo ? they have confess 'd you did . 
 duke . 't is fals . 
 escalu . how ! know you where you are ? 
 duke . respect to your great place ! and let the devil 
 be sometim honour 'd for hi burn throne ! 
 where is the duke ? 't is he should hear me speak . 
 escalu . the duke 's in us ; and we will hear you speak ; 
 look you speak justli . 
 duke . boldli , at least . but , o , poor soul , 
 come you to seek the lamb here of the fox , 
 good night to your redress ! is the duke gone ? 
 then is your caus gone too . the duke 's unjust 
 thu to retort your manifest appeal , 
 and put your trial in the villain 's mouth 
 which here you come to accus . 
 lucio . thi is the rascal ; thi is he i spoke of . 
 escalu . whi , thou unreverend and unhallow friar , 
 is't not enough thou hast suborn 'd these women 
 to accus thi worthi man , but , in foul mouth , 
 and in the wit of hi proper ear , 
 to call him villain ; and then to glanc from him 
 to th ' duke himself , to tax him with injustic ? 
 take him henc ; to th ' rack with him ! we 'll touz you 
 joint by joint , but we will know hi purpos . 
 what , 'unjust ' ! 
 duke . be not so hot ; the duke 
 dare no more stretch thi finger of mine than he 
 dare rack hi own ; hi subject am i not , 
 nor here provinci . my busi in thi state 
 made me a looker-on here in vienna , 
 where i have seen corrupt boil and bubbl 
 till it o'errun the stew : law for all fault , 
 but fault so countenanc 'd that the strong statut 
 stand like the forfeit in a barber 's shop , 
 as much in mock as mark . 
 escalu . slander to th ' state ! away with him to prison ! 
 angelo . what can you vouch against him , signior lucio ? 
 is thi the man that you did tell us of ? 
 lucio . 't is he , my lord . come hither , good-man bald-pat . 
 do you know me ? 
 duke . i rememb you , sir , by the sound of your voic . i met you at 
 the prison , in the absenc of the duke . 
 lucio . o did you so ? and do you rememb what you said of the duke ? 
 duke . most notedli , sir . 
 lucio . do you so , sir ? and wa the duke a fleshmong , a fool , and 
 a coward , as you then report him to be ? 
 duke . you must , sir , chang person with me ere you make that my 
 report ; you , inde , spoke so of him ; and much more , much wors . 
 lucio . o thou damnabl fellow ! did not i pluck thee by the nose for 
 thi speech ? 
 duke . i protest i love the duke as i love myself . 
 angelo . hark how the villain would close now , after hi treason 
 abus ! 
 escalu . such a fellow is not to be talk 'd withal . away with him to 
 prison ! where is the provost ? away with him to prison ! lay bolt 
 enough upon him ; let him speak no more . away with those giglet 
 too , and with the other confeder companion ! 
 [ the provost lay band on the duke ] 
 duke . stay , sir ; stay awhil . 
 angelo . what , resist he ? help him , lucio . 
 lucio . come , sir ; come , sir ; come , sir ; foh , sir ! whi , you 
 bald-pat lie rascal , you must be hood , must you ? show your 
 knave 's visag , with a pox to you ! show your sheep-bit face , 
 and be hang 'd an hour ! will't not off ? 
 [ pull off the friar 's bood and discov the duke ] 
 duke . thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke . 
 first , provost , let me bail these gentl three . 
 [ to lucio ] sneak not away , sir , for the friar and you 
 must have a word anon . lay hold on him . 
 lucio . thi may prove wors than hang . 
 duke . [ to escalu ] what you have spoke i pardon ; sit you down . 
 we 'll borrow place of him . [ to angelo ] sir , by your leav . 
 hast thou or word , or wit , or impud , 
 that yet can do thee offic ? if thou hast , 
 reli upon it till my tale be heard , 
 and hold no longer out . 
 angelo . o my dread lord , 
 i should be guiltier than my guilti , 
 to think i can be undiscern , 
 when i perceiv your grace , like pow ' r divin , 
 hath look 'd upon my pass . then , good princ , 
 no longer session hold upon my shame , 
 but let my trial be mine own confess ; 
 immedi sentenc then , and sequent death , 
 is all the grace i beg . 
 duke . come hither , mariana . 
 say , wast thou e'er contract to thi woman ? 
 angelo . i wa , my lord . 
 duke . go , take her henc and marri her instantli . 
 do you the offic , friar ; which consumm , 
 return him here again . go with him , provost . 
 exeunt angelo , mariana , friar peter , and provost 
 escalu . my lord , i am more amaz 'd at hi dishonour 
 than at the strang of it . 
 duke . come hither , isabel . 
 your friar is now your princ . as i wa then 
 advertis and holi to your busi , 
 not chang heart with habit , i am still 
 attorney 'd at your servic . 
 isabella . o , give me pardon , 
 that i , your vassal have employ 'd and pain 'd 
 your unknown sovereignti . 
 duke . you are pardon 'd , isabel . 
 and now , dear maid , be you as free to us . 
 your brother 's death , i know , sit at your heart ; 
 and you may marvel whi i obscur 'd myself , 
 labour to save hi life , and would not rather 
 make rash remonstr of my hidden pow ' r 
 than let him so be lost . o most kind maid , 
 it wa the swift celer of hi death , 
 which i did think with slower foot came on , 
 that brain 'd my purpos . but peac be with him ! 
 that life is better life , past fear death , 
 than that which live to fear . make it your comfort , 
 so happi is your brother . 
 isabella . i do , my lord . 
 
 re-ent angelo , mariana , friar peter , and provost 
 
 duke . for thi new-marri man approach here , 
 whose salt imagin yet hath wrong 'd 
 your well-defend honour , you must pardon 
 for mariana 's sake ; but as he adjudg 'd your brother- 
 be crimin in doubl violat 
 of sacr chastiti and of promise-breach , 
 thereon depend , for your brother 's life- 
 the veri merci of the law cri out 
 most audibl , even from hi proper tongu , 
 'an angelo for claudio , death for death ! ' 
 hast still pay hast , and leisur answer leisur ; 
 like doth quit like , and measur still for measur . 
 then , angelo , thi fault 's thu manifest , 
 which , though thou wouldst deni , deni thee vantag . 
 we do condemn thee to the veri block 
 where claudio stoop 'd to death , and with like hast . 
 away with him ! 
 mariana . o my most graciou lord , 
 i hope you will not mock me with a husband . 
 duke . it is your husband mock 'd you with a husband . 
 consent to the safeguard of your honour , 
 i thought your marriag fit ; els imput , 
 for that he knew you , might reproach your life , 
 and choke your good to come . for hi possess , 
 although by confisc they are our , 
 we do instat and widow you withal 
 to buy you a better husband . 
 mariana . o my dear lord , 
 i crave no other , nor no better man . 
 duke . never crave him ; we are definit . 
 mariana . gentl my liege- [ kneel ] 
 duke . you do but lose your labour . 
 away with him to death ! [ to lucio ] now , sir , to you . 
 mariana . o my good lord ! sweet isabel , take my part ; 
 lend me your knee , and all my life to come 
 i 'll lend you all my life to do you servic . 
 duke . against all sens you do importun her . 
 should she kneel down in merci of thi fact , 
 her brother 's ghost hi pave bed would break , 
 and take her henc in horror . 
 mariana . isabel , 
 sweet isabel , do yet but kneel by me ; 
 hold up your hand , say noth ; i 'll speak all . 
 they say best men mould out of fault ; 
 and , for the most , becom much more the better 
 for be a littl bad ; so may my husband . 
 o isabel , will you not lend a knee ? 
 duke . he die for claudio 's death . 
 isabella . [ kneel ] most bounteou sir , 
 look , if it pleas you , on thi man condemn 'd , 
 as if my brother liv 'd . i partli think 
 a due sincer govern 'd hi deed 
 till he did look on me ; sinc it is so , 
 let him not die . my brother had but justic , 
 in that he did the thing for which he die ; 
 for angelo , 
 hi act did not o'ertak hi bad intent , 
 and must be buri but as an intent 
 that perish 'd by the way . thought are no subject ; 
 intent but mere thought . 
 mariana . mere , my lord . 
 duke . your suit 's unprofit ; stand up , i say . 
 i have bethought me of anoth fault . 
 provost , how came it claudio wa behead 
 at an unusu hour ? 
 provost . it wa command so . 
 duke . had you a special warrant for the deed ? 
 provost . no , my good lord ; it wa by privat messag . 
 duke . for which i do discharg you of your offic ; 
 give up your key . 
 provost . pardon me , nobl lord ; 
 i thought it wa a fault , but knew it not ; 
 yet did repent me , after more advic ; 
 for testimoni whereof , one in the prison , 
 that should by privat order els have die , 
 i have reserv 'd aliv . 
 duke . what 's he ? 
 provost . hi name is barnardin . 
 duke . i would thou hadst done so by claudio . 
 go fetch him hither ; let me look upon him . exit provost 
 escalu . i am sorri one so learn and so wise 
 as you , lord angelo , have still appear 'd , 
 should slip so grossli , both in the heat of blood 
 and lack of temper 'd judgment afterward . 
 angelo . i am sorri that such sorrow i procur ; 
 and so deep stick it in my penit heart 
 that i crave death more willingli than merci ; 
 't is my deserv , and i do entreat it . 
 
 re-ent provost , with barnardin , claudio ( muffl ) 
 and juliet 
 
 duke . which is that barnardin ? 
 provost . thi , my lord . 
 duke . there wa a friar told me of thi man . 
 sirrah , thou art said to have a stubborn soul , 
 that apprehend no further than thi world , 
 and squar'st thi life accord . thou'rt condemn 'd ; 
 but , for those earthli fault , i quit them all , 
 and pray thee take thi merci to provid 
 for better time to come . friar , advis him ; 
 i leav him to your hand . what muffl 'd fellow 's that ? 
 provost . thi is anoth prison that i sav 'd , 
 who should have die when claudio lost hi head ; 
 as like almost to claudio as himself . [ unmuffl claudio ] 
 duke . [ to isabella ] if he be like your brother , for hi sake 
 is he pardon 'd ; and for your love sake , 
 give me your hand and say you will be mine , 
 he is my brother too . but fitter time for that . 
 by thi lord angelo perceiv he 's safe ; 
 methink i see a quick'n in hi eye . 
 well , angelo , your evil quit you well . 
 look that you love your wife ; her worth worth your . 
 i find an apt remiss in myself ; 
 and yet here 's one in place i can not pardon . 
 to lucio ] you , sirrah , that knew me for a fool , a coward , 
 one all of luxuri , an ass , a madman ! 
 wherein have i so deserv 'd of you 
 that you extol me thu ? 
 lucio . faith , my lord , i spoke it but accord to the trick . 
 if you will hang me for it , you may ; but i had rather it would 
 pleas you i might be whipt . 
 duke . whipt first , sir , and hang 'd after . 
 proclaim it , provost , round about the citi , 
 if ani woman wrong 'd by thi lewd fellow- 
 as i have heard him swear himself there 's one 
 whom he begot with child , let her appear , 
 and he shall marri her . the nuptial finish 'd , 
 let him be whipt and hang 'd . 
 lucio . i beseech your high , do not marri me to a whore . your 
 high said even now i made you a duke ; good my lord , do not 
 recompens me in make me a cuckold . 
 duke . upon mine honour , thou shalt marri her . 
 thi slander i forgiv ; and therewith 
 remit thi other forfeit . take him to prison ; 
 and see our pleasur herein execut . 
 lucio . marri a punk , my lord , is press to death , whip , 
 and hang . 
 duke . slander a princ deserv it . 
 exeunt offic with lucio 
 she , claudio , that you wrong 'd , look you restor . 
 joy to you , mariana ! love her , angelo ; 
 i have confess 'd her , and i know her virtu . 
 thank , good friend escalu , for thi much good ; 
 there 's more behind that is more gratul . 
 thank , provost , for thi care and secreci ; 
 we shall employ thee in a worthier place . 
 forgiv him , angelo , that brought you home 
 the head of ragozin for claudio 's : 
 th ' offenc pardon itself . dear isabel , 
 i have a motion much import your good ; 
 whereto if you 'll a will ear inclin , 
 what 's mine is your , and what is your is mine . 
 so , bring us to our palac , where we 'll show 
 what 's yet behind that 's meet you all should know . 
 exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the merchant of venic 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 don pedro , princ of arragon . 
 don john , hi bastard brother . 
 claudio , a young lord of florenc . 
 benedick , a young lord of padua . 
 leonato , governor of messina . 
 antonio , an old man , hi brother . 
 balthasar , attend on don pedro . 
 borachio , follow of don john . 
 conrad , follow of don john . 
 friar franci . 
 dogberri , a constabl . 
 verg , a headborough . 
 a sexton . 
 a boy . 
 
 hero , daughter to leonato . 
 beatric , niec to leonato . 
 margaret , wait gentlewoman attend on hero . 
 ursula , wait gentlewoman attend on hero . 
 
 messeng , watch , attend , etc . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene. -- messina . 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 an orchard befor leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter leonato ( governor of messina ) , hero ( hi daughter ) , 
 and beatric ( hi niec ) , with a messeng . 
 
 leon . i learn in thi letter that don pedro of arragon come thi 
 night to messina . 
 mess . he is veri near by thi . he wa not three leagu off when i 
 left him . 
 leon . how mani gentlemen have you lost in thi action ? 
 mess . but few of ani sort , and none of name . 
 leon . a victori is twice itself when the achiev bring home full 
 number . i find here that don pedro hath bestow much honour on 
 a young florentin call claudio . 
 mess . much deserv 'd on hi part , and equal rememb'r by don 
 pedro . he hath born himself beyond the promis of hi age , do 
 in the figur of a lamb the feat of a lion . he hath inde 
 better bett'r expect than you must expect of me to tell 
 you how . 
 leon . he hath an uncl here in messina will be veri much glad of it . 
 mess . i have alreadi deliv him letter , and there appear much 
 joy in him ; even so much that joy could not show itself modest 
 enough without a badg of bitter . 
 leon . did he break out into tear ? 
 mess . in great measur . 
 leon . a kind overflow of kind . there are no face truer than 
 those that are so wash 'd . how much better is it to weep at joy 
 than to joy at weep ! 
 beat . i pray you , is signior mountanto return 'd from the war or no ? 
 mess . i know none of that name , ladi . there wa none such in the 
 armi of ani sort . 
 leon . what is he that you ask for , niec ? 
 hero . my cousin mean signior benedick of padua . 
 mess . o , he 's return 'd , and as pleasant as ever he wa . 
 beat . he set up hi bill here in messina and challeng 'd cupid at 
 the flight , and my uncl 's fool , read the challeng , 
 subscrib 'd for cupid and challeng 'd him at the burbolt . i pray 
 you , how mani hath he kill 'd and eaten in these war ? but how 
 mani hath he kill 'd ? for inde i promis to eat all of hi 
 kill . 
 leon . faith , niec , you tax signior benedick too much ; but he 'll 
 be meet with you , i doubt it not . 
 mess . he hath done good servic , ladi , in these war . 
 beat . you had musti victual , and he hath holp to eat it . he is a 
 veri valiant trencherman ; he hath an excel stomach . 
 mess . and a good soldier too , ladi . 
 beat . and a good soldier to a ladi ; but what is he to a lord ? 
 mess . a lord to a lord , a man to a man ; stuff 'd with all honour 
 virtu . 
 beat . it is so inde . he is no less than a stuff 'd man ; but for 
 the stuf -- well , we are all mortal . 
 leon . you must not , sir , mistak my niec . there is a kind of merri 
 war betwixt signior benedick and her . they never meet but there 's 
 a skirmish of wit between them . 
 beat . ala , he get noth by that ! in our last conflict four of 
 hi five wit went halt off , and now is the whole man govern 'd 
 with one ; so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm , let 
 him bear it for a differ between himself and hi hors ; for 
 it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reason 
 creatur . who is hi companion now ? he hath everi month a new 
 sworn brother . 
 mess . is't possibl ? 
 beat . veri easili possibl . he wear hi faith but as the fashion 
 of hi hat ; it ever chang with the next block . 
 mess . i see , ladi , the gentleman is not in your book . 
 beat . no . an he were , i would burn my studi . but i pray you , who is 
 hi companion ? is there no young squarer now that will make a 
 voyag with him to the devil ? 
 mess . he is most in the compani of the right nobl claudio . 
 beat . o lord , he will hang upon him like a diseas ! he is sooner 
 caught than the pestil , and the taker run present mad . god 
 help the nobl claudio ! if he have caught the benedick , it will 
 cost him a thousand pound ere ' a be cure . 
 mess . i will hold friend with you , ladi . 
 beat . do , good friend . 
 leon . you will never run mad , niec . 
 beat . no , not till a hot januari . 
 mess . don pedro is approach 'd . 
 
 enter don pedro , claudio , benedick , balthasar , and john the bastard . 
 
 pedro . good signior leonato , are you come to meet your troubl ? the 
 fashion of the world is to avoid cost , and you encount it . 
 leon . never came troubl to my hous in the like of your grace ; 
 for troubl be gone , comfort should remain ; but when you depart 
 from me , sorrow abid and happi take hi leav . 
 pedro . you embrac your charg too willingli . i think thi is your 
 daughter . 
 leon . her mother hath mani time told me so . 
 bene . were you in doubt , sir , that you ask 'd her ? 
 leon . signior benedick , no ; for then were you a child . 
 pedro . you have it full , benedick . we may guess by thi what you 
 are , be a man . truli the ladi father herself . be happi , ladi ; 
 for you are like an honour father . 
 bene . if signior leonato be her father , she would not have hi head 
 on her shoulder for all messina , as like him as she is . 
 beat . i wonder that you will still be talk , signior benedick . 
 nobodi mark you . 
 bene . what , my dear ladi disdain ! are you yet live ? 
 beat . is it possibl disdain should die while she hath such meet 
 food to feed it as signior benedick ? courtesi itself must convert 
 to disdain if you come in her presenc . 
 bene . then is courtesi a turncoat . but it is certain i am love of 
 all ladi , onli you except ; and i would i could find in my 
 heart that i had not a hard heart , for truli i love none . 
 beat . a dear happi to women ! they would els have been troubl 
 with a pernici suitor . i thank god and my cold blood , i am of 
 your humour for that . i had rather hear my dog bark at a crow 
 than a man swear he love me . 
 bene . god keep your ladyship still in that mind ! so some gentleman 
 or other shall scape a predestin scratch 'd face . 
 beat . scratch could not make it wors an 'twere such a face as 
 your were . 
 bene . well , you are a rare parrot-teach . 
 beat . a bird of my tongu is better than a beast of your . 
 bene . i would my hors had the speed of your tongu , and so good a 
 continu . but keep your way , a god 's name ! i have done . 
 beat . you alway end with a jade 's trick . i know you of old . 
 pedro . that is the sum of all , leonato . signior claudio and signior 
 benedick , my dear friend leonato hath invit you all . i tell him 
 we shall stay here at the least a month , and he heartli pray 
 some occas may detain us longer . i dare swear he is no 
 hypocrit , but pray from hi heart . 
 leon . if you swear , my lord , you shall not be forsworn . [ to don 
 john ] let me bid you welcom , my lord . be reconcil to the 
 princ your brother , i owe you all duti . 
 john . i thank you . i am not of mani word , but i thank you . 
 leon . pleas it your grace lead on ? 
 pedro . your hand , leonato . we will go togeth . 
 exeunt . manent benedick and claudio . 
 claud . benedick , didst thou note the daughter of signior leonato ? 
 bene . i note her not , but i look 'd on her . 
 claud . is she not a modest young ladi ? 
 bene . do you question me , as an honest man should do , for my simpl 
 true judgment ? or would you have me speak after my custom , as 
 be a profess tyrant to their sex ? 
 claud . no . i pray thee speak in sober judgment . 
 bene . whi , i ' faith , methink she 's too low for a high prais , 
 too brown for a fair prais , and too littl for a great prais . 
 onli thi commend i can afford her , that were she other 
 than she is , she were unhandsom , and be no other but as she 
 is , i do not like her . 
 claud . thou thinkest i am in sport . i pray thee tell me truli how 
 thou lik'st her . 
 bene . would you buy her , that you enquir after her ? 
 claud . can the world buy such a jewel ? 
 bene . yea , and a case to put it into . but speak you thi with a sad 
 brow ? or do you play the flout jack , to tell us cupid is a 
 good hare-find and vulcan a rare carpent ? come , in what key 
 shall a man take you to go in the song ? 
 claud . in mine eye she is the sweetest ladi that ever i look 'd on . 
 bene . i can see yet without spectacl , and i see no such matter . 
 there 's her cousin , an she were not possess 'd with a furi , exce 
 her as much in beauti as the first of may doth the last of 
 decemb . but i hope you have no intent to turn husband , have 
 you ? 
 claud . i would scarc trust myself , though i had sworn the 
 contrari , if hero would be my wife . 
 bene . is't come to thi ? in faith , hath not the world one man but 
 he will wear hi cap with suspicion ? shall i never see a 
 bachelor of threescor again ? go to , i ' faith ! an thou wilt need 
 thrust thi neck into a yoke , wear the print of it and sigh away 
 sunday . 
 
 enter don pedro . 
 
 look ! don pedro is return to seek you . 
 pedro . what secret hath held you here , that you follow not to 
 leonato 's ? 
 bene . i would your grace would constrain me to tell . 
 pedro . i charg thee on thi allegi . 
 bene . you hear , count claudio . i can be secret as a dumb man , i 
 would have you think so ; but , on my allegi -- mark you this-on 
 my allegi ! he is in love . with who ? now that is your grace 's 
 part . mark how short hi answer is : with hero , leonato 's short 
 daughter . 
 claud . if thi were so , so were it utt'r . 
 bene . like the old tale , my lord : 'it is not so , nor 't wa not so ; 
 but inde , god forbid it should be so ! ' 
 claud . if my passion chang not shortli , god forbid it should be 
 otherwis . 
 pedro . amen , if you love her ; for the ladi is veri well worthi . 
 claud . you speak thi to fetch me in , my lord . 
 pedro . by my troth , i speak my thought . 
 claud . and , in faith , my lord , i spoke mine . 
 bene . and , by my two faith and troth , my lord , i spoke mine . 
 claud . that i love her , i feel . 
 pedro . that she is worthi , i know . 
 bene . that i neither feel how she should be love , nor know how she 
 should be worthi , is the opinion that fire can not melt out of me . 
 i will die in it at the stake . 
 pedro . thou wast ever an obstin heret in the despit of 
 beauti . 
 claud . and never could maintain hi part but in the forc of hi 
 will . 
 bene . that a woman conceiv me , i thank her ; that she brought me 
 up , i likewis give her most humbl thank ; but that i will have 
 a rechat wind in my forehead , or hang my bugl in an invis 
 baldrick , all women shall pardon me . becaus i will not do them 
 the wrong to mistrust ani , i will do myself the right to trust 
 none ; and the fine is ( for the which i may go the finer ) , i will 
 live a bachelor . 
 pedro . i shall see thee , ere i die , look pale with love . 
 bene . with anger , with sick , or with hunger , my lord ; not with 
 love . prove that ever i lose more blood with love than i will get 
 again with drink , pick out mine eye with a ballad-mak 's pen 
 and hang me up at the door of a brothel hous for the sign of 
 blind cupid . 
 pedro . well , if ever thou dost fall from thi faith , thou wilt 
 prove a notabl argument . 
 bene . if i do , hang me in a bottl like a cat and shoot at me ; and 
 he that hit me , let him be clapp 'd on the shoulder and call 'd 
 adam . 
 pedro . well , as time shall tri . 
 'in time the savag bull doth bear the yoke . ' 
 bene . the savag bull may ; but if ever the sensibl benedick bear 
 it , pluck off the bull 's horn and set them in my forehead , and 
 let me be vile paint , and in such great letter as they write 
 'here is good hors to hire , ' let them signifi under my sign 
 'here you may see benedick the marri man . ' 
 claud . if thi should ever happen , thou wouldst be horn-mad . 
 pedro . nay , if cupid have not spent all hi quiver in venic , thou 
 wilt quak for thi shortli . 
 bene . i look for an earthquak too then . 
 pedro . well , you will tempor with the hour . in the meantim , 
 good signior benedick , repair to leonato 's , commend me to him and 
 tell him i will not fail him at supper ; for inde he hath made 
 great prepar . 
 bene . i have almost matter enough in me for such an embassag ; and 
 so i commit you -- 
 claud . to the tuition of god . from my hous -- if i had it -- 
 pedro . the sixth of juli . your love friend , benedick . 
 bene . nay , mock not , mock not . the bodi of your discours is 
 sometim guard with fragment , and the guard are but slightli 
 bast on neither . ere you flout old end ani further , examin 
 your conscienc . and so i leav you . exit . 
 claud . my lieg , your high now may do me good . 
 pedro . my love is thine to teach . teach it but how , 
 and thou shalt see how apt it is to learn 
 ani hard lesson that may do thee good . 
 claud . hath leonato ani son , my lord ? 
 pedro . no child but hero ; she 's hi onli heir . 
 dost thou affect her , claudio ? 
 claud.o my lord , 
 when you went onward on thi end action , 
 i look 'd upon her with a soldier 's eye , 
 that lik 'd , but had a rougher task in hand 
 than to drive like to the name of love ; 
 but now i am return 'd and that war-thought 
 have left their place vacant , in their room 
 come throng soft and delic desir , 
 all prompt me how fair young hero is , 
 say i lik 'd her ere i went to war . 
 pedro . thou wilt be like a lover present 
 and tire the hearer with a book of word . 
 if thou dost love fair hero , cherish it , 
 and i will break with her and with her father , 
 and thou shalt have her . wast not to thi end 
 that thou began'st to twist so fine a stori ? 
 claud . how sweetli you do minist to love , 
 that know love 's grief by hi complexion ! 
 but lest my like might too sudden seem , 
 i would have salv 'd it with a longer treatis . 
 pedro . what need the bridg much broader than the flood ? 
 the fairest grant is the necess . 
 look , what will serv is fit . 't is onc , thou lovest , 
 and i will fit thee with the remedi . 
 i know we shall have revel to-night . 
 i will assum thi part in some disguis 
 and tell fair hero i am claudio , 
 and in her bosom i 'll unclasp my heart 
 and take her hear prison with the forc 
 and strong encount of my amor tale . 
 then after to her father will i break , 
 and the conclus is , she shall be thine . 
 in practic let us put it present . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a room in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter [ at one door ] leonato and [ at anoth door , antonio ] an old man , 
 brother to leonato . 
 
 leon . how now , brother ? where is my cousin your son ? hath he 
 provid thi music ? 
 ant . he is veri busi about it . but , brother , i can tell you strang 
 news that you yet dreamt not of . 
 leon . are they good ? 
 ant . as the event stamp them ; but they have a good cover , they 
 show well outward . the princ and count claudio , walk in a 
 thick-pleach alley in mine orchard , were thu much overheard by 
 a man of mine : the princ discov to claudio that he love my 
 niec your daughter and meant to acknowledg it thi night in a 
 danc , and if he found her accord , he meant to take the 
 present time by the top and instantli break with you of it . 
 leon . hath the fellow ani wit that told you thi ? 
 ant . a good sharp fellow . i will send for him , and question him 
 yourself . 
 leon . no , no . we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself ; but 
 i will acquaint my daughter withal , that she may be the better 
 prepar for an answer , if peradventur thi be true . go you and 
 tell her of it . [ exit antonio . ] 
 
 [ enter antonio 's son with a musician , and other . ] 
 
 [ to the son ] cousin , you know what you have to do . 
 -- [ to the musician ] o , i cri you merci , friend . go you with me , 
 and i will use your skill. -- good cousin , have a care thi busi 
 time . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 anoth room in leonato 's hous . ] 
 
 enter sir john the bastard and conrad , hi companion . 
 
 con . what the goodyear , my lord ! whi are you thu out of measur 
 sad ? 
 john . there is no measur in the occas that breed ; therefor 
 the sad is without limit . 
 con . you should hear reason . 
 john . and when i have heard it , what bless bring it ? 
 con . if not a present remedi , at least a patient suffer . 
 john . i wonder that thou ( be , as thou say'st thou art , born 
 under saturn ) goest about to appli a moral medicin to a 
 mortifi mischief . i can not hide what i am : i must be sad when 
 i have caus , and smile at no man 's jest ; eat when i have 
 stomach , and wait for no man 's leisur ; sleep when i am drowsi , 
 and tend on no man 's busi ; laugh when i am merri , and claw no 
 man in hi humour . 
 con . yea , but you must not make the full show of thi till you may 
 do it without control . you have of late stood out against 
 your brother , and he hath ta'en you newli into hi grace , where 
 it is imposs you should take true root but by the fair 
 weather that you make yourself . it is need that you frame the 
 season for your own harvest . 
 john . i had rather be a canker in a hedg than a rose in hi grace , 
 and it better fit my blood to be disdain 'd of all than to 
 fashion a carriag to rob love from ani . in thi , though i can not 
 be said to be a flatter honest man , it must not be deni but 
 i am a plain-deal villain . i am trust with a muzzl and 
 enfranchi 'd with a clog ; therefor i have decre not to sing in 
 my cage . if i had my mouth , i would bite ; if i had my liberti , i 
 would do my like . in the meantim let me be that i am , and seek 
 not to alter me . 
 con . can you make no use of your discont ? 
 john . i make all use of it , for i use it onli . 
 
 enter borachio . 
 
 who come here ? what news , borachio ? 
 bora . i came yonder from a great supper . the princ your brother is 
 royal entertain 'd by leonato , and i can give you intellig 
 of an intend marriag . 
 john . will it serv for ani model to build mischief on ? 
 what is he for a fool that betroth himself to unquiet ? 
 bora . marri , it is your brother 's right hand . 
 john . who ? the most exquisit claudio ? 
 bora . even he . 
 john . a proper squir ! and who ? and who ? which way look he ? 
 bora . marri , on hero , the daughter and heir of leonato . 
 john . a veri forward march-chick ! how came you to thi ? 
 bora . be entertain 'd for a perfum , as i wa smoke a musti 
 room , come me the princ and claudio , hand in hand in sad 
 confer . i whipt me behind the arra and there heard it agre 
 upon that the princ should woo hero for himself , and have 
 obtain 'd her , give her to count claudio . 
 john . come , come , let us thither . thi may prove food to my 
 displeasur . that young start-up hath all the glori of my 
 overthrow . if i can cross him ani way , i bless myself everi way . 
 you are both sure , and will assist me ? 
 con . to the death , my lord . 
 john . let us to the great supper . their cheer is the greater that 
 i am subdu . would the cook were o ' my mind ! shall we go prove 
 what 's to be done ? 
 bora . we 'll wait upon your lordship . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 a hall in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter leonato , [ antonio ] hi brother , hero hi daughter , 
 and beatric hi niec , and a kinsman ; [ also margaret and ursula ] . 
 
 leon . wa not count john here at supper ? 
 ant . i saw him not . 
 beat . how tartli that gentleman look ! i never can see him but i am 
 heart-burn 'd an hour after . 
 hero . he is of a veri melancholi disposit . 
 beat . he were an excel man that were made just in the midway 
 between him and benedick . the one is too like an imag and say 
 noth , and the other too like my ladi 's eldest son , evermor 
 tattl . 
 leon . then half signior benedick 's tongu in count john 's mouth , 
 and half count john 's melancholi in signior benedick 's face -- 
 beat . with a good leg and a good foot , uncl , and money enough in 
 hi purs , such a man would win ani woman in the world -- if ' a 
 could get her good will . 
 leon . by my troth , niec , thou wilt never get thee a husband if 
 thou be so shrewd of thi tongu . 
 ant . in faith , she 's too curst . 
 beat . too curst is more than curst . i shall lessen god 's send 
 that way , for it is said , 'god send a curst cow short horn , ' 
 but to a cow too curst he send none . 
 leon . so , by be too curst , god will send you no horn . 
 beat . just , if he send me no husband ; for the which bless i am 
 at him upon my knee everi morn and even . lord , i could not 
 endur a husband with a beard on hi face . i had rather lie in 
 the woollen ! 
 leon . you may light on a husband that hath no beard . 
 beat . what should i do with him ? dress him in my apparel and make 
 him my wait gentlewoman ? he that hath a beard is more than a 
 youth , and he that hath no beard is less than a man ; and he that 
 is more than a youth is not for me ; and he that is less than a 
 man , i am not for him . therefor i will even take sixpenc in 
 earnest of the berrord and lead hi ape into hell . 
 leon . well then , go you into hell ? 
 beat . no ; but to the gate , and there will the devil meet me like an 
 old cuckold with horn on hi head , and say 'get you to heaven , 
 beatric , get you to heaven . here 's no place for you maid . ' so 
 deliv i up my ape , and away to saint peter -- for the heaven . 
 he show me where the bachelor sit , and there live we as merri 
 as the day is long . 
 ant . [ to hero ] well , niec , i trust you will be rul 'd by your 
 father . 
 beat . ye faith . it is my cousin 's duti to make cursi and say , 
 'father , as it pleas you . ' but yet for all that , cousin , let him 
 be a handsom fellow , or els make anoth cursi , and say , 
 'father , as it pleas me . ' 
 leon . well , niec , i hope to see you one day fit with a husband . 
 beat . not till god make men of some other metal than earth . would 
 it not griev a woman to be overmast 'd with a piec of valiant 
 dust ? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl ? 
 no , uncl , i 'll none . adam 's son are my brethren , and truli i 
 hold it a sin to match in my kinr . 
 leon . daughter , rememb what i told you . if the princ do solicit 
 you in that kind , you know your answer . 
 beat . the fault will be in the music , cousin , if you be not woo 
 in good time . if the princ be too import , tell him there is 
 measur in everyth , and so danc out the answer . for , hear me , 
 hero : woo , wed , and repent is as a scotch jig , a 
 measur , and a cinque-pac : the first suit is hot and hasti like 
 a scotch jig -- and full as fantast ; the wed , mannerli 
 modest , as a measur , full of state and ancientri ; and then come 
 repent and with hi bad leg fall into the cinque-pac 
 faster and faster , till he sink into hi grave . 
 leon . cousin , you apprehend pass shrewdli . 
 beat . i have a good eye , uncl ; i can see a church by daylight . 
 leon . the revel are ent'r , brother . make good room . 
 [ exit antonio . ] 
 
 enter , [ mask , ] don pedro , claudio , benedick , and balthasar . 
 [ with them enter antonio , also mask . after them enter ] 
 don john [ and borachio ( without mask ) , who stand asid 
 and look on dure the danc ] . 
 
 pedro . ladi , will you walk a bout with your friend ? 
 hero . so you walk softli and look sweetli and say noth , 
 i am your for the walk ; and especi when i walk away . 
 pedro . with me in your compani ? 
 hero . i may say so when i pleas . 
 pedro . and when pleas you to say so ? 
 hero . when i like your favour , for god defend the lute should be 
 like the case ! 
 pedro . my visor is philemon 's roof ; within the hous is jove . 
 hero . whi then , your visor should be thatch 'd . 
 pedro . speak low if you speak love . [ take her asid . ] 
 balth . well , i would you did like me . 
 marg . so would not i for your own sake , for i have mani ill 
 qualiti . 
 balth . which is one ? 
 marg . i say my prayer aloud . 
 balth . i love you the better . the hearer may cri amen . 
 marg . god match me with a good dancer ! 
 balth . amen . 
 marg . and god keep him out of my sight when the danc is done ! 
 answer , clerk . 
 balth . no more word . the clerk is answer . 
 [ take her asid . ] 
 ur . i know you well enough . you are signior antonio . 
 ant . at a word , i am not . 
 ur . i know you by the waggl of your head . 
 ant . to tell you true , i counterfeit him . 
 ur . you could never do him so ill-wel unless you were the veri 
 man . here 's hi dri hand up and down . you are he , you are he ! 
 ant . at a word , i am not . 
 ur . come , come , do you think i do not know you by your excel 
 wit ? can virtu hide itself ? go to , mum you are he . grace will 
 appear , and there 's an end . [ they step asid . ] 
 beat . will you not tell me who told you so ? 
 bene . no , you shall pardon me . 
 beat . nor will you not tell me who you are ? 
 bene . not now . 
 beat . that i wa disdain , and that i had my good wit out of the 
 'hundr merri tale . ' well , thi wa signior benedick that said 
 so . 
 bene . what 's he ? 
 beat . i am sure you know him well enough . 
 bene . not i , believ me . 
 beat . did he never make you laugh ? 
 bene . i pray you , what is he ? 
 beat . whi , he is the princ 's jester , a veri dull fool . onli hi 
 gift is in devis imposs slander . none but libertin 
 delight in him ; and the commend is not in hi wit , but in 
 hi villani ; for he both pleas men and anger them , and then 
 they laugh at him and beat him . i am sure he is in the fleet . 
 i would he had board me . 
 bene . when i know the gentleman , i 'll tell him what you say . 
 beat . do , do . he 'll but break a comparison or two on me ; which 
 peradventur , not mark or not laugh 'd at , strike him into 
 melancholi ; and then there 's a partridg wing save , for the fool 
 will eat no supper that night . 
 [ music . ] 
 we must follow the leader . 
 bene . in everi good thing . 
 beat . nay , if they lead to ani ill , i will leav them at the next 
 turn . 
 danc . exeunt ( all but don john , borachio , and claudio ] . 
 john . sure my brother is amor on hero and hath withdrawn her 
 father to break with him about it . the ladi follow her and but 
 one visor remain . 
 bora . and that is claudio . i know him by hi bear . 
 john . are you not signior benedick ? 
 claud . you know me well . i am he . 
 john . signior , you are veri near my brother in hi love . he is 
 enamour 'd on hero . i pray you dissuad him from her ; she is no 
 equal for hi birth . you may do the part of an honest man in it . 
 claud . how know you he love her ? 
 john . i heard him swear hi affect . 
 bora . so did i too , and he swore he would marri her tonight . 
 john . come , let us to the banquet . 
 exeunt . manet claudio . 
 claud . thu answer i in name of benedick 
 but hear these ill news with the ear of claudio . 
 [ unmask . ] 
 't is certain so . the princ wooe for himself . 
 friendship is constant in all other thing 
 save in the offic and affair of love . 
 therefor all heart in love use their own tongu ; 
 let everi eye negoti for itself 
 and trust no agent ; for beauti is a witch 
 against whose charm faith melteth into blood . 
 thi is an accid of hourli proof , 
 which i mistrust not . farewel therefor hero ! 
 
 enter benedick [ unmask ] . 
 
 bene . count claudio ? 
 claud . yea , the same . 
 bene . come , will you go with me ? 
 claud . whither ? 
 bene . even to the next willow , about your own busi , counti . what 
 fashion will you wear the garland of ? about your neck , like an 
 usur 's chain ? or under your arm , like a lieuten 's scarf ? you 
 must wear it one way , for the princ hath got your hero . 
 claud . i wish him joy of her . 
 bene . whi , that 's spoken like an honest drovier . so they sell 
 bullock . but did you think the princ would have serv you 
 thu ? 
 claud . i pray you leav me . 
 bene . ho ! now you strike like the blind man ! 't wa the boy that 
 stole your meat , and you 'll beat the post . 
 claud . if it will not be , i 'll leav you . exit . 
 bene . ala , poor hurt fowl ! now will he creep into sedg . but , 
 that my ladi beatric should know me , and not know me ! the 
 princ 's fool ! ha ! it may be i go under that titl becaus i am 
 merri . yea , but so i am apt to do myself wrong . i am not so 
 reput . it is the base ( though bitter ) disposit of beatric 
 that put the world into her person and so give me out . well , 
 i 'll be reveng as i may . 
 
 enter don pedro . 
 
 pedro . now , signior , where 's the count ? did you see him ? 
 bene . troth , my lord , i have play the part of ladi fame , i found 
 him here as melancholi as a lodg in a warren . i told him , and i 
 think i told him true , that your grace had got the good will of 
 thi young ladi , and i off'r him my compani to a willow tree , 
 either to make him a garland , as be forsaken , or to bind him 
 up a rod , as be worthi to be whipt . 
 pedro . to be whipt ? what 's hi fault ? 
 bene . the flat transgress of a schoolboy who , be overjoy 
 with find a bird 's nest , show it hi companion , and he steal 
 it . 
 pedro . wilt thou make a trust a transgress ? the transgress is 
 in the stealer . 
 bene . yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made , and the 
 garland too ; for the garland he might have worn himself , and the 
 rod he might have bestow on you , who , as i take it , have stol'n 
 hi bird 's nest . 
 pedro . i will but teach them to sing and restor them to the owner . 
 bene . if their sing answer your say , by my faith you say 
 honestli . 
 pedro . the ladi beatric hath a quarrel to you . the gentleman that 
 danc 'd with her told her she is much wrong 'd by you . 
 bene . o , she misu 'd me past the endur of a block ! an oak but 
 with one green leaf on it would have answer her ; my veri visor 
 began to assum life and scold with her . she told me , not 
 think i had been myself , that i wa the princ 's jester , that 
 i wa duller than a great thaw ; huddl jest upon jest with such 
 imposs convey upon me that i stood like a man at a mark , 
 with a whole armi shoot at me . she speak poniard , and everi 
 word stab . if her breath were as terribl as her termin , 
 there were no live near her ; she would infect to the north 
 star . i would not marri her though she were endow with all that 
 adam had left him befor he transgress 'd . she would have made 
 hercul have turn 'd spit , yea , and have cleft hi club to make 
 the fire too . come , talk not of her . you shall find her the 
 infern ate in good apparel . i would to god some scholar would 
 conjur her , for certainli , while she is here , a man may live as 
 quiet in hell as in a sanctuari ; and peopl sin upon purpos , 
 becaus they would go thither ; so inde all disquiet , horror , 
 and perturb follow her . 
 
 enter claudio and beatric , leonato , hero . 
 
 pedro . look , here she come . 
 bene . will your grace command me ani servic to the world 's end ? i 
 will go on the slightest errand now to the antipod that you can 
 devis to send me on ; i will fetch you a toothpick now from the 
 furthest inch of asia ; bring you the length of prester john 's 
 foot ; fetch you a hair off the great cham 's beard ; do you ani 
 embassag to the pygmi -- rather than hold three word ' 
 confer with thi harpi . you have no employ for me ? 
 pedro . none , but to desir your good compani . 
 bene . o god , sir , here 's a dish i love not ! i can not endur my ladi 
 tongu . [ exit . ] 
 pedro . come , ladi , come ; you have lost the heart of signior 
 benedick . 
 beat . inde , my lord , he lent it me awhil , and i gave him use for 
 it -- a doubl heart for hi singl one . marri , onc befor he won 
 it of me with fals dice ; therefor your grace may well say i 
 have lost it . 
 pedro . you have put him down , ladi ; you have put him down . 
 beat . so i would not he should do me , my lord , lest i should prove 
 the mother of fool . i have brought count claudio , whom you sent 
 me to seek . 
 pedro . whi , how now , count ? wherefor are you sad ? 
 claud . not sad , my lord . 
 pedro . how then ? sick ? 
 claud . neither , my lord . 
 beat . the count is neither sad , nor sick , nor merri , nor well ; but 
 civil count -- civil as an orang , and someth of that jealou 
 complexion . 
 pedro . i ' faith , ladi , i think your blazon to be true ; though i 'll 
 be sworn , if he be so , hi conceit is fals . here , claudio , i 
 have woo in thi name , and fair hero is won . i have broke with 
 her father , and hi good will obtain . name the day of marriag , 
 and god give thee joy ! 
 leon . count , take of me my daughter , and with her my fortun . hi 
 grace hath made the match , and all grace say amen to it ! 
 beat . speak , count , 't is your cue . 
 claud . silenc is the perfectest herald of joy . i were but littl 
 happi if i could say how much . ladi , as you are mine , i am your . 
 i give away myself for you and dote upon the exchang . 
 beat . speak , cousin ; or , if you can not , stop hi mouth with a kiss 
 and let not him speak neither . 
 pedro . in faith , ladi , you have a merri heart . 
 beat . yea , my lord ; i thank it , poor fool , it keep on the windi 
 side of care . my cousin tell him in hi ear that he is in her 
 heart . 
 claud . and so she doth , cousin . 
 beat . good lord , for allianc ! thu goe everi one to the world but 
 i , and i am sunburnt . i may sit in a corner and cri 'heigh-ho for 
 a husband ! ' 
 pedro . ladi beatric , i will get you one . 
 beat . i would rather have one of your father 's get . hath your 
 grace ne'er a brother like you ? your father got excel 
 husband , if a maid could come by them . 
 pedro . will you have me , ladi ? 
 beat . no , my lord , unless i might have anoth for work day : 
 your grace is too costli to wear everi day . but i beseech your 
 grace pardon me . i wa born to speak all mirth and no matter . 
 pedro . your silenc most offend me , and to be merri best becom 
 you , for out o ' question you were born in a merri hour . 
 beat . no , sure , my lord , my mother cri ; but then there wa a star 
 danc 'd , and under that wa i born . cousin , god give you joy ! 
 leon . niec , will you look to those thing i told you of ? 
 beat . i cri you merci , uncl , by your grace 's pardon . exit . 
 pedro . by my troth , a pleasant-spirit ladi . 
 leon . there 's littl of the melancholi element in her , my lord . she 
 is never sad but when she sleep , and not ever sad then ; for i 
 have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamt of unhappi 
 and wak 'd herself with laugh . 
 pedro . she can not endur to hear tell of a husband . 
 leon . o , by no mean ! she mock all her wooer out of suit . 
 pedro . she were an excel wife for benedick . 
 leon . o lord , my lord ! if they were but a week marri , they would 
 talk themselv mad . 
 pedro . counti claudio , when mean you to go to church ? 
 claud . to-morrow , my lord . time goe on crutch till love have all 
 hi rite . 
 leon . not till monday , my dear son , which is henc a just 
 sevennight ; and a time too brief too , to have all thing answer 
 my mind . 
 pedro . come , you shake the head at so long a breath ; 
 but i warrant thee , claudio , the time shall not go dulli by us . 
 i will in the interim undertak one of hercul ' labour , which 
 is , to bring signior benedick and the ladi beatric into a 
 mountain of affect th ' one with th ' other . i would fain have 
 it a match , and i doubt not but to fashion it if you three will 
 but minist such assist as i shall give you direct . 
 leon . my lord , i am for you , though it cost me ten night ' 
 watch . 
 claud . and i , my lord . 
 pedro . and you too , gentl hero ? 
 hero . i will do ani modest offic , my lord , to help my cousin to a 
 good husband . 
 pedro . and benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that i know . 
 thu far can i prais him : he is of a nobl strain , of approv 
 valour , and confirm 'd honesti . i will teach you how to humour 
 your cousin , that she shall fall in love with benedick ; and i , 
 [ to leonato and claudio ] with your two help , will so practis on 
 benedick that , in despit of hi quick wit and hi queasi 
 stomach , he shall fall in love with beatric . if we can do thi , 
 cupid is no longer an archer ; hi glori shall be our , for we are 
 the onli love-god . go in with me , and i will tell you my drift . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a hall in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter [ don ] john and borachio . 
 
 john . it is so . the count claudio shall marri the daughter of 
 leonato . 
 bora . yea , my lord ; but i can cross it . 
 john . ani bar , ani cross , ani impedi will be med'cin to me . 
 i am sick in displeasur to him , and whatsoev come athwart hi 
 affect rang evenli with mine . how canst thou cross thi 
 marriag ? 
 bora . not honestli , my lord , but so covertli that no dishonesti 
 shall appear in me . 
 john . show me briefli how . 
 bora . i think i told your lordship , a year sinc , how much i am in 
 the favour of margaret , the wait gentlewoman to hero . 
 john . i rememb . 
 bora . i can , at ani unseason instant of the night , appoint her 
 to look out at her ladi 's chamber window . 
 john . what life is in that to be the death of thi marriag ? 
 bora . the poison of that lie in you to temper . go you to the 
 princ your brother ; spare not to tell him that he hath wrong 
 hi honour in marri the renown claudio ( whose estim do 
 you mightili hold up ) to a contamin stale , such a one as 
 hero . 
 john . what proof shall i make of that ? 
 bora . proof enough to misus the princ , to vex claudio , to undo 
 hero , and kill leonato . look you for ani other issu ? 
 john . onli to despit them i will endeavour anyth . 
 bora . go then ; find me a meet hour to draw don pedro and the count 
 claudio alon ; tell them that you know that hero love me ; intend 
 a kind of zeal both to the princ and claudio , as -- in love of 
 your brother 's honour , who hath made thi match , and hi friend 's 
 reput , who is thu like to be cozen 'd with the semblanc of 
 a maid -- that you have discov 'd thu . they will scarc believ 
 thi without trial . offer them instanc ; which shall bear no 
 less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window , hear me 
 call margaret hero , hear margaret term me claudio ; and bring them 
 to see thi the veri night befor the intend wed ( for in 
 the meantim i will so fashion the matter that hero shall be 
 absent ) and there shall appear such seem truth of hero 's 
 disloyalti that jealousi shall be call 'd assur and all the 
 prepar overthrown . 
 john . grow thi to what advers issu it can , i will put it in 
 practic . be cun in the work thi , and thi fee is a 
 thousand ducat . 
 bora . be you constant in the accus , and my cun shall not 
 shame me . 
 john . i will present go learn their day of marriag . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 leonato 's orchard . 
 
 enter benedick alon . 
 
 bene . boy ! 
 
 [ enter boy . ] 
 
 boy . signior ? 
 bene . in my chamber window lie a book . bring it hither to me in 
 the orchard . 
 boy . i am here alreadi , sir . 
 bene . i know that , but i would have thee henc and here again . 
 ( exit boy . ) i do much wonder that one man , see how much 
 anoth man is a fool when he dedic hi behaviour to love , 
 will , after he hath laugh 'd at such shallow folli in other , 
 becom the argument of hi own scorn by fall in love ; and such 
 a man is claudio . i have known when there wa no music with him 
 but the drum and the fife ; and now had he rather hear the tabor 
 and the pipe . i have known when he would have walk 'd ten mile 
 afoot to see a good armour ; and now will he lie ten night awak 
 carv the fashion of a new doublet . he wa wont to speak plain 
 and to the purpos , like an honest man and a soldier ; and now is 
 he turn 'd orthographi ; hi word are a veri fantast banquet -- 
 just so mani strang dish . may i be so convert and see with 
 these eye ? i can not tell ; i think not . i will not be sworn but 
 love may transform me to an oyster ; but i 'll take my oath on it , 
 till he have made an oyster of me he shall never make me such a 
 fool . one woman is fair , yet i am well ; anoth is wise , yet i am 
 well ; anoth virtuou , yet i am well ; but till all grace be in 
 one woman , one woman shall not come in my grace . rich she shall 
 be , that 's certain ; wise , or i 'll none ; virtuou , or i 'll never 
 cheapen her ; fair , or i 'll never look on her ; mild , or come not 
 near me ; nobl , or not i for an angel ; of good discours , an 
 excel musician , and her hair shall be of what colour it 
 pleas god . ha , the princ and monsieur love ! i will hide me in 
 the arbour . [ hide . ] 
 
 enter don pedro , leonato , claudio . 
 music [ within ] . 
 
 pedro . come , shall we hear thi music ? 
 claud . yea , my good lord . how still the even is , 
 as hush 'd on purpos to grace harmoni ! 
 pedro . see you where benedick hath hid himself ? 
 claud . o , veri well , my lord . the music end , 
 we 'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth . 
 
 enter balthasar with music . 
 
 pedro . come , balthasar , we 'll hear that song again . 
 balth . o , good my lord , tax not so bad a voic 
 to slander music ani more than onc . 
 pedro . it is the wit still of excel 
 to put a strang face on hi own perfect . 
 i pray thee sing , and let me woo no more . 
 balth . becaus you talk of woo , i will sing , 
 sinc mani a wooer doth commenc hi suit 
 to her he think not worthi , yet he wooe , 
 yet will he swear he love . 
 pedro . nay , pray thee come ; 
 or if thou wilt hold longer argument , 
 do it in note . 
 balth . note thi befor my note : 
 there 's not a note of mine that 's worth the note . 
 pedro . whi , these are veri crotchet that he speak ! 
 note note , forsooth , and noth ! [ music . ] 
 bene . [ asid ] now divin air ! now is hi soul ravish 'd ! is it not 
 strang that sheep 's gut should hale soul out of men 's bodi ? 
 well , a horn for my money , when all 's done . 
 [ balthasar sing . ] 
 the song . 
 
 sigh no more , ladi , sigh no more ! 
 men were deceiv ever , 
 one foot in sea , and one on shore ; 
 to one thing constant never . 
 then sigh not so , 
 but let them go , 
 and be you blith and bonni , 
 convert all your sound of woe 
 into hey nonni , nonni . 
 
 sing no more ditti , sing no moe , 
 of dump so dull and heavi ! 
 the fraud of men wa ever so , 
 sinc summer first wa leavi . 
 then sigh not so , & c. 
 
 pedro . by my troth , a good song . 
 balth . and an ill singer , my lord . 
 pedro . ha , no , no , faith ! thou sing'st well enough for a shift . 
 bene . [ asid ] an he had been a dog that should have howl 'd thu , 
 they would have hang 'd him ; and i pray god hi bad voic bode no 
 mischief . i had as live have heard the night raven , come what 
 plagu could have come after it . 
 pedro . yea , marri . dost thou hear , balthasar ? i pray thee get us 
 some excel music ; for to-morrow night we would have it at the 
 ladi hero 's chamber window . 
 balth . the best i can , my lord . 
 pedro . do so . farewel . 
 exit balthasar [ with musician ] . 
 come hither , leonato . what wa it you told me of to-day ? that 
 your niec beatric wa in love with signior benedick ? 
 claud . o , ay ! - [ asid to pedro ] stalk on , stalk on ; the fowl sit . 
 -- i did never think that ladi would have love ani man . 
 leon . no , nor i neither ; but most wonder that she should so dote 
 on signior benedick , whom she hath in all outward behaviour 
 seem 'd ever to abhor . 
 bene . [ asid ] is't possibl ? sit the wind in that corner ? 
 leon . by my troth , my lord , i can not tell what to think of it , but 
 that she love him with an enrag affect . it is past the 
 infinit of thought . 
 pedro . may be she doth but counterfeit . 
 claud . faith , like enough . 
 leon . o god , counterfeit ? there wa never counterfeit of passion 
 came so near the life of passion as she discov it . 
 pedro . whi , what effect of passion show she ? 
 claud . [ asid ] bait the hook well ! thi fish will bite . 
 leon . what effect , my lord ? she will sit you -- you heard my 
 daughter tell you how . 
 claud . she did inde . 
 pedro . how , how , i pray you ? you amaz me . i would have thought her 
 spirit had been invinc against all assault of affect . 
 leon . i would have sworn it had , my lord -- especi against 
 benedick . 
 bene . [ asid ] i should think thi a gull but that the white-beard 
 fellow speak it . knaveri can not , sure , hide himself in such 
 rever . 
 claud . [ asid ] he hath ta'en th ' infect . hold it up . 
 pedro . hath she made her affect known to benedick ? 
 leon . no , and swear she never will . that 's her torment . 
 claud . 't is true inde . so your daughter say . 'shall i , ' say 
 she , 'that have so oft encount'r him with scorn , write to him 
 that i love him ? ' '' 
 leon . thi say she now when she is begin to write to him ; for 
 she 'll be up twenti time a night , and there will she sit in her 
 smock till she have writ a sheet of paper . my daughter tell us 
 all . 
 claud . now you talk of a sheet of paper , i rememb a pretti jest 
 your daughter told us of . 
 leon . o , when she had writ it , and wa read it over , she found 
 'benedick ' and 'beatric ' between the sheet ? 
 claud . that . 
 leon . o , she tore the letter into a thousand halfpenc , rail 'd at 
 herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she 
 knew would flout her . ' i measur him , ' say she , 'bi my own 
 spirit ; for i should flout him if he writ to me . yea , though i 
 love him , i should . ' 
 claud . then down upon her knee she fall , weep , sob , beat her 
 heart , tear her hair , pray , curs -- ' o sweet benedick ! god give 
 me patienc ! ' 
 leon . she doth inde ; my daughter say so . and the ecstasi hath so 
 much overborn her that my daughter is sometim afeard she will 
 do a desper outrag to herself . it is veri true . 
 pedro . it were good that benedick knew of it by some other , if she 
 will not discov it . 
 claud . to what end ? he would make but a sport of it and torment the 
 poor ladi wors . 
 pedro . an he should , it were an alm to hang him ! she 's an 
 excel sweet ladi , and ( out of all suspicion ) she is virtuou . 
 claud . and she is exceed wise . 
 pedro . in everyth but in love benedick . 
 leon . o , my lord , wisdom and blood combat in so tender a bodi , 
 we have ten proof to one that blood hath the victori . i am sorri 
 for her , as i have just caus , be her uncl and her guardian . 
 pedro . i would she had bestow thi dotag on me . i would have 
 daff 'd all other respect and made her half myself . i pray you 
 tell benedick of it and hear what ' a will say . 
 leon . were it good , think you ? 
 claud . hero think sure she will die ; for she say she will die 
 if he love her not , and she will die ere she make her love known , 
 and she will die , if he woo her , rather than she will bate one 
 breath of her accustom cross . 
 pedro . she doth well . if she should make tender of her love , 't is 
 veri possibl he 'll scorn it ; for the man ( as you know all ) hath 
 a contempt spirit . 
 claud . he is a veri proper man . 
 pedro . he hath inde a good outward happi . 
 claud . befor god ! and in my mind , veri wise . 
 pedro . he doth inde show some spark that are like wit . 
 claud . and i take him to be valiant . 
 pedro . as hector , i assur you ; and in the manag of quarrel you 
 may say he is wise , for either he avoid them with great 
 discret , or undertak them with a most christianlik fear . 
 leon . if he do fear god , ' a must necessarili keep peac . if he 
 break the peac , he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and 
 trembl . 
 pedro . and so will he do ; for the man doth fear god , howsoev it 
 seem not in him by some larg jest he will make . well , i am 
 sorri for your niec . shall we go seek benedick and tell him of 
 her love ? 
 claud . never tell him , my lord . let her wear it out with good 
 counsel . 
 leon . nay , that 's imposs ; she may wear her heart out first . 
 pedro . well , we will hear further of it by your daughter . let it 
 cool the while . i love benedick well , and i could wish he would 
 modestli examin himself to see how much he is unworthi so good a 
 ladi . 
 leon . my lord , will you .walk ? dinner is readi . 
 [ they walk away . ] 
 claud . if he dote on her upon thi , i will never trust my 
 expect . 
 pedro . let there be the same net spread for her , and that must your 
 daughter and her gentlewomen carri . the sport will be , when they 
 hold one an opinion of anoth 's dotag , and no such matter . 
 that 's the scene that i would see , which will be mere a dumb 
 show . let us send her to call him in to dinner . 
 exeunt [ don pedro , claudio , and leonato ] . 
 
 [ benedick advanc from the arbour . ] 
 
 bene . thi can be no trick . the confer wa sadli born ; they 
 have the truth of thi from hero ; they seem to piti the ladi . 
 it seem her affect have their full bent . love me ? whi , it 
 must be requit . i hear how i am censur 'd . they say i will bear 
 myself proudli if i perceiv the love come from her . they say too 
 that she will rather die than give ani sign of affect . i did 
 never think to marri . i must not seem proud . happi are they that 
 hear their detract and can put them to mend . they say the 
 ladi is fair -- 't is a truth , i can bear them wit ; and virtuou 
 -- 't is so , i can not reprov it ; and wise , but for love me -- by 
 my troth , it is no addit to her wit , nor no great argument of 
 her folli , for i will be horribl in love with her . i may chanc 
 have some odd quirk and remnant of wit broken on me becaus i 
 have rail so long against marriag . but doth not the appetit 
 alter ? a man love the meat in hi youth that he can not endur 
 in hi age . shall quip and sentenc and these paper bullet of 
 the brain awe a man from the career of hi humour ? no , the world 
 must be peopl . when i said i would die a bachelor , i did not 
 think i should live till i were marri . 
 
 enter beatric . 
 
 here come beatric . by thi day , she 's a fair ladi ! i do spi 
 some mark of love in her . 
 beat . against my will i am sent to bid you come in to dinner . 
 bene . fair beatric , i thank you for your pain . 
 beat . i took no more pain for those thank than you take pain to 
 thank me . if it had been pain , i would not have come . 
 bene . you take pleasur then in the messag ? 
 beat . yea , just so much as you may take upon a knive point , and 
 choke a daw withal . you have no stomach , signior . fare you well . 
 exit . 
 bene . ha ! 'against my will i am sent to bid you come in to dinner . ' 
 there 's a doubl mean in that . ' i took no more pain for those 
 thank than you took pain to thank me . ' that 's as much as to 
 say , 'ani pain that i take for you is as easi as thank . ' if i 
 do not take piti of her , i am a villain ; if i do not love her , i 
 am a jew . i will go get her pictur . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 leonato 's orchard . 
 
 enter hero and two gentlewomen , margaret and ursula . 
 
 hero . good margaret , run thee to the parlour . 
 there shalt thou find my cousin beatric 
 propos with the princ and claudio . 
 whisper her ear and tell her , i and ursley 
 walk in the orchard , and our whole discours 
 is all of her . say that thou overheard'st us ; 
 and bid her steal into the pleach bower , 
 where honeysuckl , ripen by the sun , 
 forbid the sun to enter -- like favourit , 
 made proud by princ , that advanc their pride 
 against that power that bred it . there will she hide her 
 to listen our propos . thi is thi offic . 
 bear thee well in it and leav us alon . 
 marg . i 'll make her come , i warrant you , present . [ exit . ] 
 hero . now , ursula , when beatric doth come , 
 as we do trace thi alley up and down , 
 our talk must onli be of benedick . 
 when i do name him , let it be thi part 
 to prais him more than ever man did merit . 
 my talk to thee must be how benedick 
 is sick in love with beatric . of thi matter 
 is littl cupid 's crafti arrow made , 
 that onli wound by hearsay . 
 
 [ enter beatric . ] 
 
 now begin ; 
 for look where beatric like a lapw run 
 close by the ground , to hear our confer . 
 
 [ beatric hide in the arbour ] . 
 
 ur . the pleasant'st angl is to see the fish 
 cut with her golden oar the silver stream 
 and greedili devour the treacher bait . 
 so angl we for beatric , who even now 
 is couch in the woodbin covertur . 
 fear you not my part of the dialogu . 
 hero . then go we near her , that her ear lose noth 
 of the fals sweet bait that we lay for it . 
 [ they approach the arbour . ] 
 no , truli , ursula , she is too disdain . 
 i know her spirit are as coy and wild 
 as haggard of the rock . 
 ur . but are you sure 
 that benedick love beatric so entir ? 
 hero . so say the princ , and my new-troth lord . 
 ur . and did they bid you tell her of it , madam ? 
 hero . they did entreat me to acquaint her of it ; 
 but i persuad them , if they lov 'd benedick , 
 to wish him wrestl with affect 
 and never to let beatric know of it . 
 ur . whi did you so ? doth not the gentleman 
 deserv as full , as fortun a bed 
 as ever beatric shall couch upon ? 
 hero . o god of love ! i know he doth deserv 
 as much as may be yield to a man : 
 but natur never fram 'd a woman 's heart 
 of prouder stuff than that of beatric . 
 disdain and scorn ride sparkl in her eye , 
 mispriz what they look on ; and her wit 
 valu itself so highli that to her 
 all matter els seem weak . she can not love , 
 nor take no shape nor project of affect , 
 she is so self-endear . 
 ur . sure i think so ; 
 and therefor certainli it were not good 
 she knew hi love , lest she 'll make sport at it . 
 hero . whi , you speak truth . i never yet saw man , 
 how wise , how nobl , young , how rare featur 'd , 
 but she would spell him backward . if fair-fac 'd , 
 she would swear the gentleman should be her sister ; 
 if black , whi , natur , draw of an antic , 
 made a foul blot ; if tall , a lanc ill-head ; 
 if low , an agat veri vile cut ; 
 if speak , whi , a vane blown with all wind ; 
 if silent , whi , a block move with none . 
 so turn she everi man the wrong side out 
 and never give to truth and virtu that 
 which simpl and merit purchaseth . 
 ur . sure , sure , such carp is not commend . 
 hero . no , not to be so odd , and from all fashion , 
 as beatric is , can not be commend . 
 but who dare tell her so ? if i should speak , 
 she would mock me into air ; o , she would laugh me 
 out of myself , press me to death with wit ! 
 therefor let benedick , like cover 'd fire , 
 consum away in sigh , wast inwardli . 
 it were a better death than die with mock , 
 which is as bad as die with tickl . 
 ur . yet tell her of it . hear what she will say . 
 hero . no ; rather i will go to benedick 
 and counsel him to fight against hi passion . 
 and truli , i 'll devis some honest slander 
 to stain my cousin with . one doth not know 
 how much an ill word may empoison like . 
 ur . o , do not do your cousin such a wrong ! 
 she can not be so much without true judgment 
 ( have so swift and excel a wit 
 as she is priz 'd to have ) as to refus 
 so rare a gentleman as signior benedick . 
 hero . he is the onli man of itali , 
 alway except my dear claudio . 
 ur . i pray you be not angri with me , madam , 
 speak my fanci : signior benedick , 
 for shape , for bear , argument , and valour , 
 goe foremost in report through itali . 
 hero . inde he hath an excel good name . 
 ur . hi excel did earn it ere he had it . 
 when are you marri , madam ? 
 hero . whi , everi day to-morrow ! come , go in . 
 i 'll show thee some attir , and have thi counsel 
 which is the best to furnish me to-morrow . 
 [ they walk away . ] 
 ur . she 's lim 'd , i warrant you ! we have caught her , madam . 
 hero . if it prove so , then love goe by hap ; 
 some cupid kill with arrow , some with trap . 
 exeunt [ hero and ursula ] . 
 
 [ beatric advanc from the arbour . ] 
 
 beat . what fire is in mine ear ? can thi be true ? 
 stand i condemn 'd for pride and scorn so much ? 
 contempt , farewel ! and maiden pride , adieu ! 
 no glori live behind the back of such . 
 and , benedick , love on ; i will requit thee , 
 tame my wild heart to thi love hand . 
 if thou dost love , my kind shall incit thee 
 to bind our love up in a holi band ; 
 for other say thou dost deserv , and i 
 believ it better than reportingli . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a room in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter don pedro , claudio , benedick , and leonato . 
 
 pedro . i do but stay till your marriag be consumm , and then go 
 i toward arragon . 
 claud . i 'll bring you thither , my lord , if you 'll vouchsaf me . 
 pedro . nay , that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your 
 marriag as to show a child hi new coat and forbid him to wear 
 it . i will onli be bold with benedick for hi compani ; for , from 
 the crown of hi head to the sole of hi foot , he is all mirth . 
 he hath twice or thrice cut cupid 's bowstr , and the littl 
 hangman dare not shoot at him . he hath a heart as sound as a 
 bell ; and hi tongu is the clapper , for what hi heart think , 
 hi tongu speak . 
 bene . gallant , i am not as i have been . 
 leon . so say i. methink you are sadder . 
 claud . i hope he be in love . 
 pedro . hang him , truant ! there 's no true drop of blood in him to be 
 truli touch 'd with love . if he be sad , he want money . 
 bene . i have the toothach . 
 pedro . draw it . 
 bene . hang it ! 
 claud . you must hang it first and draw it afterward . 
 pedro . what ? sigh for the toothach ? 
 leon . where is but a humour or a worm . 
 bene . well , everi one can master a grief but he that ha it . 
 claud . yet say i he is in love . 
 pedro . there is no appear of fanci in him , unless it be a fanci 
 that he hath to strang disguis ; as to be a dutchman to-day , a 
 frenchman to-morrow ; or in the shape of two countri at onc , as 
 a german from the waist downward , all slop , and a spaniard from 
 the hip upward , no doublet . unless he have a fanci to thi 
 fooleri , as it appear he hath , he is no fool for fanci , as you 
 would have it appear he is . 
 claud . if he be not in love with some woman , there is no believ 
 old sign . ' a brush hi hat o ' morn . what should that bode ? 
 pedro . hath ani man seen him at the barber 's ? 
 claud . no , but the barber 's man hath been seen with him , and the 
 old ornament of hi cheek hath alreadi stuff 'd tenni ball . 
 leon . inde he look younger than he did , by the loss of a beard . 
 pedro . nay , ' a rub himself with civet . can you smell him out by 
 that ? 
 claud . that 's as much as to say , the sweet youth 's in love . 
 pedro . the greatest note of it is hi melancholi . 
 claud . and when wa he wont to wash hi face ? 
 pedro . yea , or to paint himself ? for the which i hear what they say 
 of him . 
 claud . nay , but hi jest spirit , which is new-crept into a 
 lutestr , and now govern 'd by stop . 
 pedro . inde that tell a heavi tale for him . conclud , conclud , 
 he is in love . 
 claud . nay , but i know who love him . 
 pedro . that would i know too . i warrant , one that know him not . 
 claud . ye , and hi ill condit ; and in despit of all , die for 
 him . 
 pedro . she shall be buri with her face upward . 
 bene . yet is thi no charm for the toothach . old signior , walk 
 asid with me . i have studi eight or nine wise word to speak 
 to you , which these hobby-hors must not hear . 
 [ exeunt benedick and leonato . ] 
 pedro . for my life , to break with him about beatric ! 
 claud . 't is even so . hero and margaret have by thi play their 
 part with beatric , and then the two bear will not bite one 
 anoth when they meet . 
 
 enter john the bastard . 
 
 john . my lord and brother , god save you . 
 pedro . good den , brother . 
 john . if your leisur serv 'd , i would speak with you . 
 pedro . in privat ? 
 john . if it pleas you . yet count claudio may hear , for what i 
 would speak of concern him . 
 pedro . what 's the matter ? 
 john . [ to claudio ] mean your lordship to be marri tomorrow ? 
 pedro . you know he doe . 
 john . i know not that , when he know what i know . 
 claud . if there be ani impedi , i pray you discov it . 
 john . you may think i love you not . let that appear hereaft , and 
 aim better at me by that i now will manifest . for my brother , i 
 think he hold you well and in dear of heart hath holp to 
 effect your ensu marriag -- sure suit ill spent and labour 
 ill bestow ! 
 pedro . whi , what 's the matter ? 
 john . i came hither to tell you , and , circumst short'n ( for 
 she ha been too long a-talk of ) , the ladi is disloy . 
 claud . who ? hero ? 
 john . even she -- leonato 's hero , your hero , everi man 's hero . 
 claud . disloy ? 
 john . the word is too good to paint out her wicked . i could say 
 she were wors ; think you of a wors titl , and i will fit her to 
 it . wonder not till further warrant . go but with me to-night , you 
 shall see her chamber window ent'r , even the night befor her 
 wed day . if you love her then , to-morrow wed her . but it 
 would better fit your honour to chang your mind . 
 claud . may thi be so ? 
 pedro . i will not think it . 
 john . if you dare not trust that you see , confess not that you 
 know . if you will follow me , i will show you enough ; and when you 
 have seen more and heard more , proceed accordingli . 
 claud . if i see anyth to-night whi i should not marri her 
 to-morrow , in the congreg where i should wed , there will i 
 shame her . 
 pedro . and , as i woo for thee to obtain her , i will join with 
 thee to disgrac her . 
 john . i will disparag her no farther till you are my wit . 
 bear it coldli but till midnight , and let the issu show itself . 
 pedro . o day untowardli turn ! 
 claud . o mischief strang thwart ! 
 john . o plagu right well prevent ! 
 so will you say when you have seen the sequel . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a street . 
 
 enter dogberri and hi compartn [ verg ] , with the watch . 
 
 dog . are you good men and true ? 
 verg . yea , or els it were piti but they should suffer salvat , 
 bodi and soul . 
 dog . nay , that were a punish too good for them if they should 
 have ani allegi in them , be chosen for the princ 's watch . 
 verg . well , give them their charg , neighbour dogberri . 
 dog . first , who think you the most desartless man to be constabl ? 
 < num > . watch . hugh oatcak , sir , or georg seacoal ; for they can write 
 and read . 
 dog . come hither , neighbour seacoal . god hath bless 'd you with a 
 good name . to be a well-favour man is the gift of fortun , but 
 to write and read come by natur . 
 < num > . watch . both which , master constabl -- 
 dog . you have . i knew it would be your answer . well , for your 
 favour , sir , whi , give god thank and make no boast of it ; and 
 for your write and read , let that appear when there is no 
 need of such vaniti . you are thought here to be the most 
 senseless and fit man for the constabl of the watch . therefor 
 bear you the lanthorn . thi is your charg : you shall comprehend 
 all vagrom men ; you are to bid ani man stand , in the princ 's 
 name . 
 < num > . watch . how if ' a will not stand ? 
 dog . whi then , take no note of him , but let him go , and present 
 call the rest of the watch togeth and thank god you are rid of 
 a knave . 
 verg . if he will not stand when he is bidden , he is none of the 
 princ 's subject . 
 dog . true , and they are to meddl with none but the princ 's 
 subject . you shall also make no nois in the street ; for for 
 the watch to babbl and to talk is most toler , and not to be 
 endur . 
 < num > . watch . we will rather sleep than talk . we know what belong to 
 a watch . 
 dog . whi , you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman , for i 
 can not see how sleep should offend . onli have a care that your 
 bill be not stol'n . well , you are to call at all the alehous 
 and bid those that are drunk get them to bed . 
 < num > . watch . how if they will not ? 
 dog . whi then , let them alon till they are sober . if they make you 
 not then the better answer , you may say they are not the men you 
 took them for . 
 < num > . watch . well , sir . 
 dog . if you meet a thief , you may suspect him , by virtu of your 
 offic , to be no true man ; and for such kind of men , the less you 
 meddl or make with them , whi , the more your honesti . 
 < num > . watch . if we know him to be a thief , shall we not lay hand on 
 him ? 
 dog . truli , by your offic you may ; but i think they that touch 
 pitch will be defil 'd . the most peaceabl way for you , if you do 
 take a thief , is to let him show himself what he is , and steal 
 out of your compani . 
 verg . you have been alway call a merci man , partner . 
 dog . truli , i would not hang a dog by my will , much more a man who 
 hath ani honesti in him . 
 verg . if you hear a child cri in the night , you must call to the 
 nurs and bid her still it . 
 < num > . watch . how if the nurs be asleep and will not hear us ? 
 dog . whi then , depart in peac and let the child wake her with 
 cri ; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it bae will 
 never answer a calf when he bleat . 
 verg . 't is veri true . 
 dog . thi is the end of the charg : you , constabl , are to present 
 the princ 's own person . if you meet the princ in the night , 
 you may stay him . 
 verg . nay , by ' r ladi , that i think ' a can not . 
 dog . five shill to one o n't with ani man that know the 
 statut , he may stay him ! marri , not without the princ be 
 will ; for inde the watch ought to offend no man , and it is 
 an offenc to stay a man against hi will . 
 verg . by ' r ladi , i think it be so . 
 dog . ha , ah , ha ! well , master , good night . an there be ani matter 
 of weight chanc , call up me . keep your fellow ' counsel and 
 your own , and good night . come , neighbour . 
 < num > . watch . well , master , we hear our charg . let us go sit here 
 upon the church bench till two , and then all to bed . 
 dog . one word more , honest neighbour . i pray you watch about 
 signior leonato 's door ; for the wed be there tomorrow , 
 there is a great coil to-night . adieu . be vigit , i beseech 
 you . exeunt [ dogberri and verg ] . 
 
 enter borachio and conrad . 
 
 bora . what , conrad ! 
 < num > . watch . [ asid ] peac ! stir not ! 
 bora . conrad , i say ! 
 con . here , man . i am at thi elbow . 
 bora . mass , and my elbow itch 'd ! i thought there would a scab 
 follow . 
 con . i will owe thee an answer for that ; and now forward with thi 
 tale . 
 bora . stand thee close then under thi penthous , for it drizzl 
 rain , and i will , like a true drunkard , utter all to thee . 
 < num > . watch . [ asid ] some treason , master . yet stand close . 
 bora . therefor know i have earn of don john a thousand ducat . 
 con . is it possibl that ani villani should be so dear ? 
 bora . thou shouldst rather ask if it were possibl ani villani 
 should be so rich ; for when rich villain have need of poor one , 
 poor one may make what price they will . 
 con . i wonder at it . 
 bora . that show thou art unconfirm 'd . thou knowest that the 
 fashion of a doublet , or a hat , or a cloak , is noth to a man . 
 con . ye , it is apparel . 
 bora . i mean the fashion . 
 con . ye , the fashion is the fashion . 
 bora . tush ! i may as well say the fool 's the fool . but seest thou 
 not what a deform thief thi fashion is ? 
 < num > . watch . [ asid ] i know that deform . ' a ba been a vile thief 
 thi seven year ; ' a goe up and down like a gentleman . i rememb 
 hi name . 
 bora . didst thou not hear somebodi ? 
 con . no ; 't wa the vane on the hous . 
 bora . seest thou not , i say , what a deform thief thi fashion is ? 
 how giddili ' a turn about all the hot-blood between fourteen 
 and five-and-thirti ? sometim fashion them like pharaoh 's 
 soldier in the reechi paint , sometim like god bel 's priest 
 in the old church window , sometim like the shaven hercul in 
 the smirch 'd worm-eaten tapestri , where hi codpiec seem as 
 massi as hi club ? 
 con . all thi i see ; and i see that the fashion wear out more 
 apparel than the man . but art not thou thyself giddi with the 
 fashion too , that thou hast shift out of thi tale into tell 
 me of the fashion ? 
 bora . not so neither . but know that i have to-night woo margaret , 
 the ladi hero 's gentlewoman , by the name of hero . she lean me 
 out at her mistress ' chamber window , bid me a thousand time 
 good night -- i tell thi tale vile ; i should first tell thee how 
 the princ , claudio and my master , plant and place and 
 possess by my master don john , saw afar off in the orchard thi 
 amiabl encount . 
 con . and thought they margaret wa hero ? 
 bora . two of them did , the princ and claudio ; but the devil my 
 master knew she wa margaret ; and partli by hi oath , which 
 first possess 'd them , partli by the dark night , which did deceiv 
 them , but chiefli by my villani , which did confirm ani slander 
 that don john had made , away went claudio enrag 'd ; swore he would 
 meet her , as he wa appoint , next morn at the templ , and 
 there , befor the whole congreg , shame her with what he saw 
 o'ernight and send her home again without a husband . 
 < num > . watch . we charg you in the princ 's name stand ! 
 < num > . watch . call up the right master constabl . we have here 
 recov 'd the most danger piec of lecheri that ever wa known 
 in the commonwealth . 
 < num > . watch . and one deform is one of them . i know him ; ' a wear a 
 lock . 
 con . master , master -- 
 < num > . watch . you 'll be made bring deform forth , i warrant you . 
 con . master -- 
 < num > . watch . never speak , we charg you . let us obey you to go with 
 us . 
 bora . we are like to prove a goodli commod , be taken up of 
 these men 's bill . 
 con . a commod in question , i warrant you . come , we 'll obey you . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 a room in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter hero , and margaret and ursula . 
 
 hero . good ursula , wake my cousin beatric and desir her to rise . 
 ur . i will , ladi . 
 hero . and bid her come hither . 
 ur . well . [ exit . ] 
 marg . troth , i think your other rebato were better . 
 hero . no , pray thee , good meg , i 'll wear thi . 
 marg . by my troth , 's not so good , and i warrant your cousin will 
 say so . 
 hero . my cousin 's a fool , and thou art anoth . i 'll wear none but 
 thi . 
 marg . i like the new tire within excel , if the hair were a 
 thought browner ; and your gown 's a most rare fashion , i ' faith . 
 i saw the duchess of milan 's gown that they prais so . 
 hero . o , that exce , they say . 
 marg . by my troth , 's but a nightgown in respect of your -- 
 cloth-o'-gold and cut , and lac 'd with silver , set with pearl 
 down sleev , side-sleev , and skirt , round underborn with 
 a blush tinsel . but for a fine , quaint , grace , and excel 
 fashion , your is worth ten o n't . 
 hero . god give me joy to wear it ! for my heart is exceed heavi . 
 marg . 'twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man . 
 hero . fie upon thee ! art not asham ? 
 marg . of what , ladi ? of speak honour ? is not marriag 
 honour in a beggar ? is not your lord honour without 
 marriag ? i think you would have me say , 'save your rever , 
 a husband . ' an bad think do not wrest true speak , i 'll 
 offend nobodi . is there ani harm in 'the heavier for a husband ' ? 
 none , i think , an it be the right husband and the right wife . 
 otherwis 't is light , and not heavi . ask my ladi beatric els . 
 here she come . 
 
 enter beatric . 
 
 hero . good morrow , coz . 
 beat . good morrow , sweet hero . 
 hero . whi , how now ? do you speak in the sick tune ? 
 beat . i am out of all other tune , methink . 
 marg . clap 's into 'light o ' love . ' that goe without a burden . do 
 you sing it , and i 'll danc it . 
 beat . yea , 'light o ' love ' with your heel ! then , if your husband 
 have stabl enough , you 'll see he shall lack no barn . 
 marg . o illegitim construct ! i scorn that with my heel . 
 beat . 't is almost five o'clock , cousin ; 't is time you were readi . 
 by my troth , i am exceed ill. hey-ho ! 
 marg . for a hawk , a hors , or a husband ? 
 beat . for the letter that begin them all , h. 
 marg . well , an you be not turn 'd turk , there 's no more sail by 
 the star . 
 beat . what mean the fool , trow ? 
 marg . noth i ; but god send everi one their heart 's desir ! 
 hero . these glove the count sent me , they are an excel 
 perfum . 
 beat . i am stuff 'd , cousin ; i can not smell . 
 marg . a maid , and stuff 'd ! there 's goodli catch of cold . 
 beat . o , god help me ! god help me ! how long have you profess 'd 
 apprehens ? 
 marg . ever sinc you left it . doth not my wit becom me rare ? 
 beat . it is not seen enough . you should wear it in your cap . by my 
 troth , i am sick . 
 marg . get you some of thi distil 'd carduu benedictu and lay it 
 to your heart . it is the onli thing for a qualm . 
 hero . there thou prick'st her with a thistl . 
 beat . benedictu ? whi benedictu ? you have some moral in thi 
 'benedictu . ' 
 marg . moral ? no , by my troth , i have no moral mean ; i meant 
 plain holi thistl . you may think perchanc that i think you are 
 in love . nay , by ' r ladi , i am not such a fool to think what i 
 list ; nor i list not to think what i can ; nor inde i can not 
 think , if i would think my heart out of think , that you are in 
 love , or that you will be in love , or that you can be in love . 
 yet benedick wa such anoth , and now is he becom a man . he 
 swore he would never marri ; and yet now in despit of hi heart 
 he eat hi meat without grudg ; and how you may be convert i 
 know not , but methink you look with your eye as other women do . 
 beat . what pace is thi that thi tongu keep ? 
 marg . not a fals gallop . 
 
 enter ursula . 
 
 ur . madam , withdraw . the princ , the count , signior benedick , don 
 john , and all the gallant of the town are come to fetch you to 
 church . 
 hero . help to dress me , good coz , good meg , good ursula . 
 [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 the hall in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter leonato and the constabl [ dogberri ] and the headborough [ verg ] . 
 
 leon . what would you with me , honest neighbour ? 
 dog . marri , sir , i would have some confid with you that decern 
 you nearli . 
 leon . brief , i pray you ; for you see it is a busi time with me . 
 dog . marri , thi it is , sir . 
 verg . ye , in truth it is , sir . 
 leon . what is it , my good friend ? 
 dog . goodman verg , sir , speak a littl off the matter -- an old 
 man , sir , and hi wit are not so blunt as , god help , i would 
 desir they were ; but , in faith , honest as the skin between hi 
 brow . 
 verg . ye , i thank god i am as honest as ani man live that is an 
 old man and no honest than i . 
 dog . comparison are odor . palabra , neighbour verg . 
 leon . neighbour , you are tediou . 
 dog . it pleas your worship to say so , but we are the poor duke 's 
 offic ; but truli , for mine own part , if i were as tediou as a 
 king , i could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship . 
 leon . all thi tedious on me , ah ? 
 dog . yea , in 'twere a thousand pound more than 't is ; for i hear as 
 good exclam on your worship as of ani man in the citi ; and 
 though i be but a poor man , i am glad to hear it . 
 verg . and so am i . 
 leon . i would fain know what you have to say . 
 verg . marri , sir , our watch to-night , except your worship 's 
 presenc , ha ' ta'en a coupl of as arrant knave as ani in 
 messina . 
 dog . a good old man , sir ; he will be talk . as they say , 'when 
 the age is in , the wit is out . ' god help us ! it is a world to 
 see ! well said , i ' faith , neighbour verg . well , god 's a good 
 man . an two men ride of a hors , one must ride behind . an honest 
 soul , i ' faith , sir , by my troth he is , as ever broke bread ; but 
 god is to be worshipp 'd ; all men are not alik , ala , good 
 neighbour ! 
 leon . inde , neighbour , he come too short of you . 
 dog . gift that god give . 
 leon . i must leav you . 
 dog . one word , sir . our watch , sir , have inde comprehend two 
 aspici person , and we would have them thi morn examin 
 befor your worship . 
 leon . take their examin yourself and bring it me . i am now in 
 great hast , as it may appear unto you . 
 dog . it shall be suffig . 
 leon . drink some wine ere you go . fare you well . 
 
 [ enter a messeng . ] 
 
 mess . my lord , they stay for you to give your daughter to her 
 husband . 
 leon . i 'll wait upon them . i am readi . 
 [ exeunt leonato and messeng . ] 
 dog . go , good partner , go get you to franci seacoal ; bid him bring 
 hi pen and inkhorn to the jail . we are now to examin these 
 men . 
 verg . and we must do it wise . 
 dog . we will spare for no wit , i warrant you . here 's that shall 
 drive some of them to a non-com . onli get the learn writer to 
 set down our excommun , and meet me at the jail . 
 [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 a church . 
 
 enter don pedro , [ john the ] bastard , leonato , friar [ franci ] , claudio , 
 benedick , hero , beatric , [ and attend ] . 
 
 leon . come , friar franci , be brief . onli to the plain form of 
 marriag , and you shall recount their particular duti 
 afterward . 
 friar . you come hither , my lord , to marri thi ladi ? 
 claud . no . 
 leon . to be marri to her . friar , you come to marri her . 
 friar . ladi , you come hither to be marri to thi count ? 
 hero . i do . 
 friar . if either of you know ani inward impedi whi you should 
 not be conjoin , i charg you on your soul to utter it . 
 claud . know you ani , hero ? 
 hero . none , my lord . 
 friar . know you ani , count ? 
 leon . i dare make hi answer -- none . 
 claud . o , what men dare do ! what men may do ! what men daili do , not 
 know what they do ! 
 bene . how now ? interject ? whi then , some be of laugh , as , 
 ah , ha , he ! 
 claud . stand thee by , friar . father , by your leav : 
 will you with free and unconstrain soul 
 give me thi maid your daughter ? 
 leon . as freeli , son , as god did give her me . 
 claud . and what have i to give you back whose worth 
 may counterpois thi rich and preciou gift ? 
 pedro . noth , unless you render her again . 
 claud . sweet princ , you learn me nobl thank . 
 there , leonato , take her back again . 
 give not thi rotten orang to your friend . 
 she 's but the sign and semblanc of her honour . 
 behold how like a maid she blush here ! 
 o , what author and show of truth 
 can cun sin cover itself withal ! 
 come not that blood as modest evid 
 to wit simpl virtu , would you not swear , 
 all you that see her , that she were a maid 
 by these exterior show ? but she is none : 
 she know the heat of a luxuri bed ; 
 her blush is guilti , not modesti . 
 leon . what do you mean , my lord ? 
 claud . not to be marri , 
 not to knit my soul to an approv wanton . 
 leon . dear my lord , if you , in your own proof , 
 have vanquish 'd the resist of her youth 
 and made defeat of her virgin -- 
 claud . i know what you would say . if i have known her , 
 you will say she did embrac me as a husband , 
 and so extenu the forehand sin . 
 no , leonato , 
 i never tempt her with word too larg , 
 but , as a brother to hi sister , show 'd 
 bash sincer and come love . 
 hero . and seem 'd i ever otherwis to you ? 
 claud . out on the seem ! i will write against it . 
 you seem to me as dian in her orb , 
 as chast as is the bud ere it be blown ; 
 but you are more intemper in your blood 
 than venu , or those pamp'r anim 
 that rage in savag sensual . 
 hero . is my lord well that he doth speak so wide ? 
 leon . sweet princ , whi speak not you ? 
 pedro . what should i speak ? 
 i stand dishonour 'd that have gone about 
 to link my dear friend to a common stale . 
 leon . are these thing spoken , or do i but dream ? 
 john . sir , they are spoken , and these thing are true . 
 bene . thi look not like a nuptial . 
 hero . 'true ! ' o god ! 
 claud . leonato , stand i here ? 
 is thi the princ , is thi the princ 's brother ? 
 is thi face hero 's ? are our eye our own ? 
 leon . all thi is so ; but what of thi , my lord ? 
 claud . let me but move one question to your daughter , 
 and by that fatherli and kindli power 
 that you have in her , bid her answer truli . 
 leon . i charg thee do so , as thou art my child . 
 hero . o , god defend me ! how am i beset ! 
 what kind of catechis call you thi ? 
 claud . to make you answer truli to your name . 
 hero . is it not hero ? who can blot that name 
 with ani just reproach ? 
 claud . marri , that can hero ! 
 hero itself can blot out hero 's virtu . 
 what man wa he talk 'd with you yesternight , 
 out at your window betwixt twelv and one ? 
 now , if you are a maid , answer to thi . 
 hero . i talk 'd with no man at that hour , my lord . 
 pedro . whi , then are you no maiden . leonato , 
 i am sorri you must hear . upon my honour , 
 myself , my brother , and thi griev count 
 did see her , hear her , at that hour last night 
 talk with a ruffian at her chamber window , 
 who hath inde , most like a liber villain , 
 confess 'd the vile encount they have had 
 a thousand time in secret . 
 john . fie , fie ! they are not to be nam 'd , my lord -- 
 not to be spoke of ; 
 there is not chastiti , enough in languag 
 without offenc to utter them . thu , pretti ladi , 
 i am sorri for thi much misgovern . 
 claud . o hero ! what a hero hadst thou been 
 if half thi outward grace had been plac 'd 
 about thi thought and counsel of thi heart ! 
 but fare thee well , most foul , most fair ! farewel , 
 thou pure impieti and impiou puriti ! 
 for thee i 'll lock up all the gate of love , 
 and on my eyelid shall conjectur hang , 
 to turn all beauti into thought of harm , 
 and never shall it more be graciou . 
 leon . hath no man 's dagger here a point for me ? 
 [ hero swoon . ] 
 beat . whi , how now , cousin ? wherefor sink you down ? 
 john . come let us go . these thing , come thu to light , 
 smother her spirit up . 
 [ exeunt don pedro , don juan , and claudio . ] 
 bene . how doth the ladi ? 
 beat . dead , i think . help , uncl ! 
 hero ! whi , hero ! uncl ! signior benedick ! friar ! 
 leon . o fate , take not away thi heavi hand ! 
 death is the fairest cover for her shame 
 that may be wish 'd for . 
 beat . how now , cousin hero ? 
 friar . have comfort , ladi . 
 leon . dost thou look up ? 
 friar . yea , wherefor should she not ? 
 leon . wherefor ? whi , doth not everi earthli thing 
 cri shame upon her ? could she here deni 
 the stori that is print in her blood ? 
 do not live , hero ; do not ope thine eye ; 
 for , did i think thou wouldst not quickli die , 
 thought i thi spirit were stronger than thi shame , 
 myself would on the rearward of reproach 
 strike at thi life . griev 'd i , i had but one ? 
 child i for that at frugal natur 's frame ? 
 o , one too much by thee ! whi had i one ? 
 whi ever wast thou love in my eye ? 
 whi had i not with charit hand 
 took up a beggar 's issu at my gate , 
 who smirch thu and mir 'd with infami , 
 i might have said , 'no part of it is mine ; 
 thi shame deriv itself from unknown loin ' ? 
 but mine , and mine i lov 'd , and mine i prai 'd , 
 and mine that i wa proud on -- mine so much 
 that i myself wa to myself not mine , 
 valu of her -- whi , she , o , she is fall'n 
 into a pit of ink , that the wide sea 
 hath drop too few to wash her clean again , 
 and salt too littl which may season give 
 to her foul taint flesh ! 
 bene . sir , sir , be patient . 
 for my part , i am so attir 'd in wonder , 
 i know not what to say . 
 beat . o , on my soul , my cousin is beli ! 
 bene . ladi , were you her bedfellow last night ? 
 beat . no , truli , not ; although , until last night , 
 i have thi twelvemonth been her bedfellow 
 leon . confirm 'd , confirm 'd ! o , that is stronger made 
 which wa befor barr 'd up with rib of iron ! 
 would the two princ lie ? and claudio lie , 
 who lov 'd her so that , speak of her foul , 
 wash 'd it with tear ? henc from her ! let her die . 
 friar . hear me a littl ; 
 for i have onli been silent so long , 
 and given way unto thi cours of fortun , 
 by note of the ladi . i have mark 'd 
 a thousand blush apparit 
 to start into her face , a thousand innoc shame 
 in angel white beat away those blush , 
 and in her eye there hath appear 'd a fire 
 to burn the error that these princ hold 
 against her maiden truth . call me a fool ; 
 trust not my read nor my observ , 
 which with experiment seal doth warrant 
 the tenur of my book ; trust not my age , 
 my rever , call , nor divin , 
 if thi sweet ladi lie not guiltless here 
 under some bite error . 
 leon . friar , it can not be . 
 thou seest that all the grace that she hath left 
 is that she will not add to her damnat 
 a sin of perjuri : she not deni it . 
 whi seek'st thou then to cover with excus 
 that which appear in proper naked ? 
 friar . ladi , what man is he you are accu 'd of ? 
 hero . they know that do accus me ; i know none . 
 if i know more of ani man aliv 
 than that which maiden modesti doth warrant , 
 let all my sin lack merci ! o my father , 
 prove you that ani man with me conver 'd 
 at hour unmeet , or that i yesternight 
 maintain 'd the chang of word with ani creatur , 
 refus me , hate me , tortur me to death ! 
 friar . there is some strang mispris in the princ . 
 bene . two of them have the veri bent of honour ; 
 and if their wisdom be misl in thi , 
 the practic of it live in john the bastard , 
 whose spirit toil in frame of villani . 
 leon . i know not . if they speak but truth of her , 
 these hand shall tear her . if they wrong her honour , 
 the proudest of them shall well hear of it . 
 time hath not yet so dri thi blood of mine , 
 nor age so eat up my invent , 
 nor fortun made such havoc of my mean , 
 nor my bad life reft me so much of friend , 
 but they shall find awak 'd in such a kind 
 both strength of limb and polici of mind , 
 abil in mean , and choic of friend , 
 to quit me of them throughli . 
 friar . paus awhil 
 and let my counsel sway you in thi case . 
 your daughter here the princ left for dead , 
 let her awhil be secretli kept in , 
 and publish it that she is dead inde ; 
 maintain a mourn ostent , 
 and on your famili 's old monument 
 hang mourn epitaph , and do all rite 
 that appertain unto a burial . 
 leon . what shall becom of thi ? what will thi do ? 
 friar . marri , thi well carri shall on her behalf 
 chang slander to remors . that is some good . 
 but not for that dream i on thi strang cours , 
 but on thi travail look for greater birth . 
 she die , as it must be so maintain 'd , 
 upon the instant that she wa accu 'd , 
 shall be lament , piti , and excu 'd 
 of everi hearer ; for it so fall out 
 that what we have we prize not to the worth 
 while we enjoy it , but be lack 'd and lost , 
 whi , then we rack the valu , then we find 
 the virtu that possess would not show us 
 while it wa our . so will it fare with claudio . 
 when he shall hear she die upon hi word , 
 th ' idea of her life shall sweetli creep 
 into hi studi of imagin , 
 and everi love organ of her life 
 shall come apparel 'd in more preciou habit , 
 more move , delic , and full of life , 
 into the eye and prospect of hi soul 
 than when she liv 'd inde . then shall he mourn 
 ( if ever love had interest in hi liver ) 
 and wish he had not so accus her -- 
 no , though be thought hi accus true . 
 let thi be so , and doubt not but success 
 will fashion the event in better shape 
 than i can lay it down in likelihood . 
 but if all aim but thi be level 'd fals , 
 the supposit of the ladi 's death 
 will quench the wonder of her infami . 
 and if it sort not well , you may conceal her , 
 as best befit her wound reput , 
 in some reclus and religi life , 
 out of all eye , tongu , mind , and injuri . 
 bene . signior leonato , let the friar advis you ; 
 and though you know my inward and love 
 is veri much unto the princ and claudio , 
 yet , by mine honour , i will deal in thi 
 as secretli and justli as your soul 
 should with your bodi . 
 leon . be that i flow in grief , 
 the smallest twine may lead me . 
 friar . 't is well consent . present away ; 
 for to strang sore strang they strain the cure . 
 come , ladi , die to live . thi wed day 
 perhap is but prolong 'd . have patienc and endur . 
 exeunt [ all but benedick and beatric ] . 
 bene . ladi beatric , have you wept all thi while ? 
 beat . yea , and i will weep a while longer . 
 bene . i will not desir that . 
 beat . you have no reason . i do it freeli . 
 bene . sure i do believ your fair cousin is wrong . 
 beat . ah , how much might the man deserv of me that would right 
 her ! 
 bene . is there ani way to show such friendship ? 
 beat . a veri even way , but no such friend . 
 bene . may a man do it ? 
 beat . it is a man 's offic , but not your . 
 bene . i do love noth in the world so well as you . is not that 
 strang ? 
 beat . as strang as the thing i know not . it were as possibl for 
 me to say i love noth so well as you . but believ me not ; and 
 yet i lie not . i confess noth , nor i deni noth . i am sorri 
 for my cousin . 
 bene . by my sword , beatric , thou lovest me . 
 beat . do not swear , and eat it . 
 bene . i will swear by it that you love me , and i will make him eat 
 it that say i love not you . 
 beat . will you not eat your word ? 
 bene . with no sauc that can be devis to it . i protest i love 
 thee . 
 beat . whi then , god forgiv me ! 
 bene . what offenc , sweet beatric ? 
 beat . you have stay me in a happi hour . i wa about to protest i 
 love you . 
 bene . and do it with all thi heart . 
 beat . i love you with so much of my heart that none is left to 
 protest . 
 bene . come , bid me do anyth for thee . 
 beat . kill claudio . 
 bene . ha ! not for the wide world ! 
 beat . you kill me to deni it . farewel . 
 bene . tarri , sweet beatric . 
 beat . i am gone , though i am here . there is no love in you . nay , i 
 pray you let me go . 
 bene . beatric -- 
 beat . in faith , i will go . 
 bene . we 'll be friend first . 
 beat . you dare easier be friend with me than fight with mine 
 enemi . 
 bene . is claudio thine enemi ? 
 beat . is ' a not approv in the height a villain , that hath 
 slander , scorn , dishonour my kinswoman ? o that i were a 
 man ! what ? bear her in hand until they come to take hand , and 
 then with public accus , uncov 'd slander , unmitig 
 rancour -- o god , that i were a man ! i would eat hi heart in the 
 market place . 
 bene . hear me , beatric ! 
 beat . talk with a man out at a window ! -a proper say ! 
 bene . nay but beatric -- 
 beat . sweet hero ! she is wrong 'd , she is sland'r , she is undon . 
 bene . beat -- 
 beat . princ and counti ! sure a princ testimoni , a goodli 
 count , count comfect , a sweet gallant sure ! o that i were a man 
 for hi sake ! or that i had ani friend would be a man for my 
 sake ! but manhood is melt into cursi , valour into compliment , 
 and men are onli turn 'd into tongu , and trim one too . he is now 
 as valiant as hercul that onli tell a lie , and swear it . i 
 can not be a man with wish ; therefor i will die a woman with 
 griev . 
 bene . tarri , good beatric . by thi hand , i love thee . 
 beat . use it for my love some other way than swear by it . 
 bene . think you in your soul the count claudio hath wrong 'd hero ? 
 beat . yea , as sure is i have a thought or a soul . 
 bene . enough , i am engag 'd , i will challeng him . i will kiss your 
 hand , and so i leav you . by thi hand , claudio shall render me a 
 dear account . as you hear of me , so think of me . go comfort your 
 cousin . i must say she is dead-and so farewel . 
 [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a prison . 
 
 enter the constabl [ dogberri and verg ] and the sexton , in gown , 
 [ and the watch , with conrad and ] borachio . 
 
 dog . is our whole dissembl appear 'd ? 
 verg . o , a stool and a cushion for the sexton . 
 sex . which be the malefactor ? 
 dog . marri , that am i and my partner . 
 verg . nay , that 's certain . we have the exhibit to examin . 
 sex . but which are the offend that are to be examin ? let them 
 come befor master constabl . 
 dog . yea , marri , let them come befor me . what is your name , 
 friend ? 
 bor . borachio . 
 dog . pray write down borachio . your , sirrah ? 
 con . i am a gentleman , sir , and my name is conrad . 
 dog . write down master gentleman conrad . master , do you serv 
 god ? 
 both . yea , sir , we hope . 
 dog . write down that they hope they serv god ; and write god first , 
 for god defend but god should go befor such villain ! master , 
 it is prove alreadi that you are littl better than fals 
 knave , and it will go near to be thought so shortli . how answer 
 you for yourselv ? 
 con . marri , sir , we say we are none . 
 dog . a marvel witti fellow , i assur you ; but i will go about 
 with him . come you hither , sirrah . a word in your ear . sir , i say 
 to you , it is thought you are fals knave . 
 bora . sir , i say to you we are none . 
 dog . well , stand asid . fore god , they are both in a tale . 
 have you writ down that they are none ? 
 sex . master constabl , you go not the way to examin . you must call 
 forth the watch that are their accus . 
 dog . yea , marri , that 's the eftest way . let the watch come forth . 
 master , i charg you in the princ 's name accus these men . 
 < num > . watch . thi man said , sir , that don john the princ 's brother 
 wa a villain . 
 dog . write down princ john a villain . whi , thi is flat perjuri , 
 to call a princ 's brother villain . 
 bora . master constabl -- 
 dog . pray thee , fellow , peac . i do not like thi look , i promis 
 thee . 
 sex . what heard you him say els ? 
 < num > . watch . marri , that he had receiv a thousand ducat of don john 
 for accus the ladi hero wrong . 
 dog . flat burglari as ever wa commit . 
 verg . yea , by th ' mass , that it is . 
 sex . what els , fellow ? 
 < num > . watch . and that count claudio did mean , upon hi word , to 
 disgrac hero befor the whole assembl , and not marri her . 
 dog . o villain ! thou wilt be condemn 'd into everlast redempt 
 for thi . 
 sex . what els ? 
 watchmen . thi is all . 
 sex . and thi is more , master , than you can deni . princ john is 
 thi morn secretli stol'n away . hero wa in thi manner 
 accu 'd , in thi manner refu 'd , and upon the grief of thi 
 suddenli die . master constabl , let these men be bound and 
 brought to leonato 's . i will go befor and show him their 
 examin . [ exit . ] 
 dog . come , let them be opinion 'd . 
 verg . let them be in the hand -- 
 con . off , coxcomb ! 
 dog . god 's my life , where 's the sexton ? let him write down the 
 princ 's offic coxcomb . come , bind them. -- thou naughti varlet ! 
 con . away ! you are an ass , you are an ass . 
 dog . dost thou not suspect my place ? dost thou not suspect my 
 year ? o that he were here to write me down an ass ! but , master , 
 rememb that i am an ass . though it be not written down , yet 
 forget not that i am an ass . no , thou villain , thou art full of 
 pieti , as shall be prov 'd upon thee by good wit . i am a wise 
 fellow ; and which is more , an offic ; and which is more , a 
 household ; and which is more , as pretti a piec of flesh as ani 
 is in messina , and one that know the law , go to ! and a rich 
 fellow enough , go to ! and a fellow that hath had loss ; and one 
 that hath two gown and everyth handsom about him . bring him 
 away . o that i had been writ down an ass ! 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the street , near leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter leonato and hi brother [ antonio ] . 
 
 ant . if you go on thu , you will kill yourself , 
 and 't is not wisdom thu to second grief 
 against yourself . 
 leon . i pray thee ceas thi counsel , 
 which fall into mine ear as profitless 
 as water in a siev . give not me counsel , 
 nor let no comfort delight mine ear 
 but such a one whose wrong do suit with mine . 
 bring me a father that so lov 'd hi child , 
 whose joy of her is overwhelm 'd like mine , 
 and bid him speak to me of patienc . 
 measur hi woe the length and breadth of mine , 
 and let it answer everi strain for strain , 
 as thu for thu , and such a grief for such , 
 in everi lineament , branch , shape , and form . 
 if such a one will smile and stroke hi beard , 
 bid sorrow wag , cri 'hem ' when he should groan , 
 patch grief with proverb , make misfortun drunk 
 with candle-wast -- bring him yet to me , 
 and i of him will gather patienc . 
 but there is no such man ; for , brother , men 
 can counsel and speak comfort to that grief 
 which they themselv not feel ; but , tast it , 
 their counsel turn to passion , which befor 
 would give precepti medicin to rage , 
 fetter strong mad in a silken thread , 
 charm ach with air and agoni with word . 
 no , no ! 't is all men 's offic to speak patienc 
 to those that wring under the load of sorrow , 
 but no man 's virtu nor suffici 
 to be so moral when he shall endur 
 the like himself . therefor give me no counsel . 
 my grief cri louder than advertis . 
 ant . therein do men from children noth differ . 
 leon . i pray thee peac . i will be flesh and blood ; 
 for there wa never yet philosoph 
 that could endur the toothach patient , 
 howev they have writ the style of god 
 and made a push at chanc and suffer . 
 ant . yet bend not all the harm upon yourself . 
 make those that do offend you suffer too . 
 leon . there thou speak'st reason . nay , i will do so . 
 my soul doth tell me hero is beli ; 
 and that shall claudio know ; so shall the princ , 
 and all of them that thu dishonour her . 
 
 enter don pedro and claudio . 
 
 ant . here come the princ and claudio hastili . 
 pedro . good den , good den . 
 claud . good day to both of you . 
 leon . hear you , my lord ! 
 pedro . we have some hast , leonato . 
 leon . some hast , my lord ! well , fare you well , my lord . 
 are you so hasti now ? well , all is one . 
 pedro . nay , do not quarrel with us , good old man . 
 ant . if he could right himself with quarrel , 
 some of us would lie low . 
 claud . who wrong him ? 
 leon . marri , thou dost wrong me , thou dissembl , thou ! 
 nay , never lay thi hand upon thi sword ; 
 i fear thee not . 
 claud . mari , beshrew my hand 
 if it should give your age such caus of fear . 
 in faith , my hand meant noth to my sword . 
 leon . tush , tush , man ! never fleer and jest at me 
 i speak not like a dotard nor a fool , 
 as under privileg of age to brag 
 what i have done be young , or what would do , 
 were i not old . know , claudio , to thi head , 
 thou hast so wrong 'd mine innoc child and me 
 that i am forc 'd to lay my rever by 
 and , with grey hair and bruis of mani day , 
 do challeng thee to trial of a man . 
 i say thou hast beli mine innoc child ; 
 thi slander hath gone through and through her heart , 
 and she lie buri with her ancestors- 
 o , in a tomb where never scandal slept , 
 save thi of her , fram 'd by thi villani ! 
 claud . my villani ? 
 leon . thine , claudio ; thine i say . 
 pedro . you say not right , old man 
 leon . my lord , my lord , 
 i 'll prove it on hi bodi if he dare , 
 despit hi nice fenc and hi activ practic , 
 hi may of youth and bloom of lustihood . 
 claud . away ! i will not have to do with you . 
 leon . canst thou so daff me ? thou hast kill 'd my child . 
 if thou kill'st me , boy , thou shalt kill a man . 
 and . he shall kill two of us , and men inde 
 but that 's no matter ; let him kill one first . 
 win me and wear me ! let him answer me . 
 come , follow me , boy , . come , sir boy , come follow me . 
 sir boy , i 'll whip you from your foin fenc ! 
 nay , as i am a gentleman , i will . 
 leon . brother -- 
 ant . content yourself . god know i lov 'd my niec , 
 and she is dead , slander 'd to death by villain , 
 that dare as well answer a man inde 
 as i dare take a serpent by the tongu . 
 boy , ape , braggart , jack , milksop ! 
 leon . brother anthoni -- 
 ant . hold you content . what , man ! i know them , yea , 
 and what they weigh , even to the utmost scrupl , 
 scambl , outfac , fashion-mong boy , 
 that lie and cog and flout , deprav and slander , 
 go anticli , show outward hideous , 
 and speak off half a dozen dang'rou word , 
 how they might hurt their enemi , if they durst ; 
 and thi is all . 
 leon . but , brother anthoni -- 
 ant . come , 't is no matter . 
 do not you meddl ; let me deal in thi . 
 pedro . gentlemen both , we will not wake your patienc . 
 my heart is sorri for your daughter 's death ; 
 but , on my honour , she wa charg 'd with noth 
 but what wa true , and veri full of proof . 
 leon . my lord , my lord -- 
 pedro . i will not hear you . 
 leon . no ? come , brother , away ! -- i will be heard . 
 ant . and shall , or some of us will smart for it . 
 exeunt ambo . 
 
 enter benedick . 
 
 pedro . see , see ! here come the man we went to seek . 
 claud . now , signior , what news ? 
 bene . good day , my lord . 
 pedro . welcom , signior . you are almost come to part almost a fray . 
 claud . we had lik 'd to have had our two nose snapp 'd off with two 
 old men without teeth . 
 pedro . leonato and hi brother . what think'st thou ? had we fought , 
 i doubt we should have been too young for them . 
 bene . in a fals quarrel there is no true valour . i came to seek 
 you both . 
 claud . we have been up and down to seek thee ; for we are high-proof 
 melancholi , and would fain have it beaten away . wilt thou use thi 
 wit ? 
 bene . it is in my scabbard . shall i draw it ? 
 pedro . dost thou wear thi wit by thi side ? 
 claud . never ani did so , though veri mani have been besid their 
 wit . i will bid thee draw , as we do the minstrel -- draw to 
 pleasur us . 
 pedro . as i am an honest man , he look pale . art thou sick or 
 angri ? 
 claud . what , courag , man ! what though care kill 'd a cat , thou hast 
 mettl enough in thee to kill care . 
 bene . sir , i shall meet your wit in the career an you charg it 
 against me . i pray you choos anoth subject . 
 claud . nay then , give him anoth staff ; thi last wa broke cross . 
 pedro . by thi light , he chang more and more . i think he be angri 
 inde . 
 claud . if he be , he know how to turn hi girdl . 
 bene . shall i speak a word in your ear ? 
 claud . god bless me from a challeng ! 
 bene . [ asid to claudio ] you are a villain . i jest not ; i will make 
 it good how you dare , with what you dare , and when you dare . do 
 me right , or i will protest your cowardic . you have kill 'd a 
 sweet ladi , and her death shall fall heavi on you . let me hear 
 from you . 
 claud . well , i will meet you , so i may have good cheer . 
 pedro . what , a feast , a feast ? 
 claud . i ' faith , i thank him , he hath bid me to a calv 's head and 
 a capon , the which if i do not carv most curious , say my 
 knife 's naught . shall i not find a woodcock too ? 
 bene . sir , your wit ambl well ; it goe easili . 
 pedro . i 'll tell thee how beatric prai 'd thi wit the other day . i 
 said thou hadst a fine wit : 'true , ' said she , ' a fine littl 
 one . ' 'no , ' said i , ' a great wit . ' 'right , ' say she , ' a great 
 gross one . ' 'nay , ' said i , ' a good wit . ' 'just , ' said she , 'it 
 hurt nobodi . ' 'nay , ' said i , 'the gentleman is wise . ' 'certain , ' 
 said she , a wise gentleman . ' 'nay , ' said i , 'he hath the 
 tongu . ' 'that i believ ' said she , 'for he swore a thing to me 
 on monday night which he forswor on tuesday morn . there 's a 
 doubl tongu ; there 's two tongu . ' thu did she an hour 
 togeth transshap thi particular virtu . yet at last she 
 conclud with a sigh , thou wast the proper'st man in itali . 
 claud . for the which she wept heartili and said she care not . 
 pedro . yea , that she did ; but yet , for all that , an if she did not 
 hate him deadli , she would love him dearli . the old man 's 
 daughter told us all . 
 claud . all , all ! and moreov , god saw him when he wa hid in the 
 garden . 
 pedro . but when shall we set the savag bull 's horn on the 
 sensibl benedick 's head ? 
 claud . yea , and text underneath , 'here dwell benedick , the marri 
 man ' ? 
 bene . fare you well , boy ; you know my mind . i will leav you now to 
 your gossiplik humour . you break jest as braggard do their 
 blade , which god be thank hurt not . my lord , for your mani 
 courtesi i thank you . i must discontinu your compani . your 
 brother the bastard is fled from messina . you have among you 
 kill 'd a sweet and innoc ladi . for my lord lackbeard there , he 
 and i shall meet ; and till then peac be with him . 
 [ exit . ] 
 pedro . he is in earnest . 
 claud . in most profound earnest ; and , i 'll warrant you , for the 
 love of beatric . 
 pedro . and hath challeng 'd thee . 
 claud . most sincer . 
 pedro . what a pretti thing man is when he goe in hi doublet and 
 hose and leav off hi wit ! 
 
 enter constabl [ dogberri and verg , with the watch , lead ] 
 conrad and borachio . 
 
 claud . he is then a giant to an ape ; but then is an ape a doctor to 
 such a man . 
 pedro . but , soft you , let me be ! pluck up , my heart , and be sad ! 
 did he not say my brother wa fled ? 
 dog . come you , sir . if justic can not tame you , she shall ne'er 
 weigh more reason in her balanc . nay , an you be a curs 
 hypocrit onc , you must be look 'd to . 
 pedro . how now ? two of my brother 's men bound ? borachio one . 
 claud . hearken after their offenc , my lord . 
 pedro . offic , what offenc have these men done ? 
 dog . marri , sir , they have commit fals report ; moreov , they 
 have spoken untruth ; secondarili , they are slander ; sixth and 
 lastli , they have beli a ladi ; thirdli , they have verifi 
 unjust thing ; and to conclud , they are lie knave . 
 pedro . first , i ask thee what they have done ; thirdli , i ask thee 
 what 's their offenc ; sixth and lastli , whi they are commit ; 
 and to conclud , what you lay to their charg . 
 claud . rightli reason , and in hi own divis ; and by my troth 
 there 's one mean well suit . 
 pedro . who have you offend , master , that you are thu bound to 
 your answer ? thi learn constabl is too cun to be 
 understood . what 's your offenc ? 
 bora . sweet princ , let me go no farther to mine answer . do you 
 hear me , and let thi count kill me . i have deceiv even your 
 veri eye . what your wisdom could not discov , these shallow 
 fool have brought to light , who in the night overheard me 
 confess to thi man , how don john your brother incens me to 
 slander the ladi hero ; how you were brought into the orchard and 
 saw me court margaret in hero 's garment ; how you disgrac 'd her 
 when you should marri her . my villani they have upon record , 
 which i had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my 
 shame . the ladi is dead upon mine and my master 's fals 
 accus ; and briefli , i desir noth but the reward of a 
 villain . 
 pedro . run not thi speech like iron through your blood ? 
 claud . i have drunk poison while he utter 'd it . 
 pedro . but did my brother set thee on to thi ? 
 bora . yea , and paid me richli for the practic of it . 
 pedro . he is compo 'd and fram 'd of treacheri , 
 and fled he is upon thi villani . 
 claud . sweet hero , now thi imag doth appear 
 in the rare semblanc that i lov 'd it first . 
 dog . come , bring away the plaintiff . by thi time our sexton hath 
 reform signior leonato of the matter . and , master , do not 
 forget to specifi , when time and place shall serv , that i am an 
 ass . 
 verg . here , here come master signior leonato , and the sexton too . 
 
 enter leonato , hi brother [ antonio ] , and the sexton . 
 
 leon . which is the villain ? let me see hi eye , 
 that , when i note anoth man like him , 
 i may avoid him . which of these is he ? 
 bora . if you would know your wronger , look on me . 
 leon . art thou the slave that with thi breath hast kill 'd 
 mine innoc child ? 
 bora . yea , even i alon . 
 leon . no , not so , villain ! thou beliest thyself . 
 here stand a pair of honour men -- 
 a third is fled -- that had a hand in it . 
 i thank you princ for my daughter 's death . 
 record it with your high and worthi deed . 
 't wa brave done , if you bethink you of it . 
 claud . i know not how to pray your patienc ; 
 yet i must speak . choos your reveng yourself ; 
 impos me to what penanc your invent 
 can lay upon my sin . yet sinn 'd i not 
 but in mistak . 
 pedro . by my soul , nor i ! 
 and yet , to satisfi thi good old man , 
 i would bend under ani heavi weight 
 that he 'll enjoin me to . 
 leon . i can not bid you bid my daughter live- 
 that were imposs ; but i pray you both , 
 possess the peopl in messina here 
 how innoc she die ; and if your love 
 can labour aught in sad invent , 
 hang her an epitaph upon her tomb , 
 and sing it to her bone -- sing it to-night . 
 to-morrow morn come you to my hous , 
 and sinc you could not be my son-in-law , 
 be yet my nephew . my brother hath a daughter , 
 almost the copi of my child that 's dead , 
 and she alon is heir to both of us . 
 give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin , 
 and so die my reveng . 
 claud . o nobl sir ! 
 your over-kind doth wring tear from me . 
 i do embrac your offer ; and dispos 
 for henceforth of poor claudio . 
 leon . to-morrow then i will expect your come ; 
 to-night i take my leav . thi naughti man 
 shall fact to face be brought to margaret , 
 who i believ wa pack 'd in all thi wrong , 
 hir 'd to it by your brother . 
 bora . no , by my soul , she wa not ; 
 nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me ; 
 but alway hath been just and virtuou 
 in anyth that i do know by her . 
 dog . moreov , sir , which inde is not under white and black , thi 
 plaintiff here , the offend , did call me ass . i beseech you let 
 it be rememb'r in hi punish . and also the watch heard them 
 talk of one deform . they say he wear a key in hi ear , and a 
 lock hang by it , and borrow money in god 's name , the which he 
 hath us 'd so long and never paid that now men grow hard-heart 
 and will lend noth for god 's sake . pray you examin him upon 
 that point . 
 leon . i thank thee for thi care and honest pain . 
 dog . your worship speak like a most thank and rever youth , 
 and i prais god for you . 
 leon . there 's for thi pain . [ give money . ] 
 dog . god save the foundat ! 
 leon . go , i discharg thee of thi prison , and i thank thee . 
 dog . i leav an arrant knave with your worship , which i beseech 
 your worship to correct yourself , for the exampl of other . 
 god keep your worship ! i wish your worship well . god restor you 
 to health ! i humbl give you leav to depart ; and if a merri 
 meet may be wish 'd , god prohibit it ! come , neighbour . 
 exeunt [ dogberri and verg ] . 
 leon . until to-morrow morn , lord , farewel . 
 ant . farewel , my lord . we look for you to-morrow . 
 pedro . we will not fall . 
 claud . to-night i 'll mourn with hero . 
 [ exeunt don pedro and claudio . ] 
 leon . [ to the watch ] bring you these fellow on. -- we 'll talk with 
 margaret , 
 how her acquaint grew with thi lewd fellow . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 leonato 's orchard . 
 
 enter benedick and margaret [ meet ] . 
 
 bene . pray thee , sweet mistress margaret , deserv well at my hand 
 by help me to the speech of beatric . 
 marg . will you then write me a sonnet in prais of my beauti ? 
 bene . in so high a style , margaret , that no man live shall come 
 over it ; for in most come truth thou deservest it . 
 marg . to have no man come over me ? whi , shall i alway keep below 
 stair ? 
 bene . thi wit is as quick as the greyhound 's mouth -- it catch . 
 marg . and your as blunt as the fencer 's foil , which hit but hurt 
 not . 
 bene . a most manli wit , margaret : it will not hurt a woman . 
 and so i pray thee call beatric . i give thee the buckler . 
 marg . give us the sword ; we have buckler of our own . 
 bene . if you use them , margaret , you must put in the pike with a 
 vice , and they are danger weapon for maid . 
 marg . well , i will call beatric to you , who i think hath leg . 
 bene . and therefor will come . 
 exit margaret . 
 [ sing ] the god of love , 
 that sit abov 
 and know me , and know me , 
 how piti i deserv -- 
 
 i mean in sing ; but in love leander the good swimmer , 
 troilu the first employ of pander , and a whole book full of 
 these quondam carpet-mong , whose name yet run smoothli in the 
 even road of a blank vers -- whi , they were never so truli turn 'd 
 over and over as my poor self in love . marri , i can not show it in 
 rhyme . i have tri . i can find out no rhyme to 'ladi ' but 'babi ' 
 -- an innoc rhyme ; for 'scorn , ' 'horn ' -- a hard rhyme ; for 
 'school ' , 'fool ' -- a babbl rhyme : veri omin end ! no , i 
 wa not born under a rhyme planet , nor can not woo in festiv 
 term . 
 
 enter beatric . 
 
 sweet beatric , wouldst thou come when i call 'd thee ? 
 beat . yea , signior , and depart when you bid me . 
 bene . o , stay but till then ! 
 beat . 'then ' is spoken . fare you well now . and yet , ere i go , let 
 me go with that i came for , which is , with know what hath 
 pass 'd between you and claudio . 
 bene . onli foul word ; and thereupon i will kiss thee . 
 beat . foul word is but foul wind , and foul wind is but foul 
 breath , and foul breath is noisom . therefor i will depart 
 unkiss 'd . 
 bene . thou hast fright the word out of hi right sens , so 
 forcibl is thi wit . but i must tell thee plainli , claudio 
 undergo my challeng ; and either i must shortli hear from him 
 or i will subscrib him a coward . and i pray thee now tell me , 
 for which of my bad part didst thou first fall in love with me ? 
 beat . for them all togeth , which maintain 'd so polit a state of 
 evil that they will not admit ani good part to intermingl with 
 them . but for which of my good part did you first suffer love 
 for me ? 
 bene . suffer love ! -- a good epithet . i do suffer love inde , for i 
 love thee against my will . 
 beat . in spite of your heart , i think . ala , poor heart ! if you 
 spite it for my sake , i will spite it for your , for i will never 
 love that which my friend hate . 
 bene . thou and i are too wise to woo peaceabl . 
 beat . it appear not in thi confess . there 's not one wise man 
 among twenti , that will prais himself . 
 bene . an old , an old instanc , beatric , that liv 'd in the time of 
 good neighbour . if a man do not erect in thi age hi own tomb 
 ere he die , he shall live no longer in monument than the bell 
 ring and the widow weep . 
 beat . and how long is that , think you ? 
 bene . question : whi , an hour in clamour and a quarter in rheum . 
 therefor is it most expedi for the wise , if don worm ( hi 
 conscienc ) find no impedi to the contrari , to be the trumpet 
 of hi own virtu , as i am to myself . so much for prais 
 myself , who , i myself will bear wit , is praiseworthi . and now 
 tell me , how doth your cousin ? 
 beat . veri ill. 
 bene . and how do you ? 
 beat . veri ill too . 
 bene . serv god , love me , and mend . there will i leav you too , for 
 here come one in hast . 
 
 enter ursula . 
 
 ur . madam , you must come to your uncl . yonder 's old coil at home . 
 it is prove my ladi hero hath been fals accu 'd , the princ 
 and claudio mightili abu 'd , and don john is the author of all , 
 who is fled and gone . will you come present ? 
 beat . will you go hear thi news , signior ? 
 bene . i will live in thi heart , die in thi lap , and be buri thi 
 eye ; and moreov , i will go with thee to thi uncl 's . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a churchyard . 
 
 enter claudio , don pedro , and three or four with taper , 
 [ follow by musician ] . 
 
 claud . is thi the monument of leonato ? 
 lord . it is , my lord . 
 claud . [ read from a scroll ] 
 
 epitaph . 
 
 done to death by slander tongu 
 wa the hero that here lie . 
 death , in guerdon of her wrong , 
 give her fame which never die . 
 so the life that die with shame 
 live in death with gloriou fame . 
 
 hang thou there upon the tomb , 
 [ hang up the scroll . ] 
 prais her when i am dumb . 
 now , music , sound , and sing your solemn hymn . 
 
 song . 
 
 pardon , goddess of the night , 
 those that slew thi virgin knight ; 
 for the which , with song of woe , 
 round about her tomb they go . 
 midnight , assist our moan , 
 help us to sigh and groan 
 heavili , heavili , 
 grave , yawn and yield your dead , 
 till death be utter 
 heavili , heavili . 
 
 claud . now unto thi bone good night ! 
 yearli will i do thi rite . 
 pedro . good morrow , master . put your torch out . 
 the wolv have prey 'd , and look , the gentl day , 
 befor the wheel of phoebu , round about 
 dappl the drowsi east with spot of grey . 
 thank to you all , and leav us . fare you well . 
 claud . good morrow , master . each hi sever way . 
 pedro . come , let us henc and put on other weed , 
 and then to leonato 's we will go . 
 claud . and hymen now with luckier issu speed 
 than thi for whom we rend'r up thi woe . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv 
 the hall in leonato 's hous . 
 
 enter leonato , benedick , [ beatric , ] margaret , ursula , antonio , 
 friar [ franci ] , hero . 
 
 friar . did i not tell you she wa innoc ? 
 leon . so are the princ and claudio , who accu 'd her 
 upon the error that you heard debat . 
 but margaret wa in some fault for thi , 
 although against her will , as it appear 
 in the true cours of all the question . 
 ant . well , i am glad that all thing sort so well . 
 bene . and so am i , be els by faith enforc 'd 
 to call young claudio to a reckon for it . 
 leon . well , daughter , and you gentlewomen all , 
 withdraw into a chamber by yourselv , 
 and when i send for you , come hither mask 'd . 
 exeunt ladi . 
 the princ and claudio promi 'd by thi hour 
 to visit me . you know your offic , brother : 
 you must be father to your brother 's daughter , 
 and give her to young claudio . 
 ant . which i will do with confirm 'd counten . 
 bene . friar , i must entreat your pain , i think . 
 friar . to do what , signior ? 
 bene . to bind me , or undo me -- one of them . 
 signior leonato , truth it is , good signior , 
 your niec regard me with an eye of favour . 
 leon . that eye my daughter lent her . 't is most true . 
 bene . and i do with an eye of love requit her . 
 leon . the sight whereof i think you had from me , 
 from claudio , and the princ ; but what 's your will ? 
 bene . your answer , sir , is enigmat ; 
 but , for my will , my will is , your good will 
 may stand with our , thi day to be conjoin 'd 
 in the state of honour marriag ; 
 in which , good friar , i shall desir your help . 
 leon . my heart is with your like . 
 friar . and my help . 
 
 enter don pedro and claudio and two or three other . 
 
 here come the princ and claudio . 
 pedro . good morrow to thi fair assembl . 
 leon . good morrow , princ ; good morrow , claudio . 
 we here attend you . are you yet determin 'd 
 to-day to marri with my brother 's daughter ? 
 claud . i 'll hold my mind , were she an ethiop . 
 leon . call her forth , brother . here 's the friar readi . 
 [ exit antonio . ] 
 pedro . good morrow , benedick . whi , what 's the matter 
 that you have such a februari face , 
 so full of frost , of storm , and cloudi ? 
 claud . i think he think upon the savag bull . 
 tush , fear not , man ! we 'll tip thi horn with gold , 
 and all europa shall rejoic at thee , 
 as onc europa did at lusti jove 
 when he would play the nobl beast in love . 
 bene . bull jove , sir , had an amiabl low , 
 and some such strang bull leap 'd your father 's cow 
 and got a calf in that same nobl feat 
 much like to you , for you have just hi bleat . 
 
 enter [ leonato 's ] brother [ antonio ] , hero , beatric , 
 margaret , ursula , [ the ladi wear mask ] . 
 
 claud . for thi i owe you . here come other reckon . 
 which is the ladi i must seiz upon ? 
 ant . thi same is she , and i do give you her . 
 claud . whi then , she 's mine . sweet , let me see your face . 
 leon . no , that you shall not till you take her hand 
 befor thi friar and swear to marri her . 
 claud . give me your hand befor thi holi friar . 
 i am your husband if you like of me . 
 hero . and when i liv 'd i wa your other wife ; [ unmask . ] 
 and when you lov 'd you were my other husband . 
 claud . anoth hero ! 
 hero . noth certain . 
 one hero die defil 'd ; but i do live , 
 and sure as i live , i am a maid . 
 pedro . the former hero ! hero that is dead ! 
 leon . she die , my lord , but while her slander liv 'd . 
 friar . all thi amaz can i qualifi , 
 when , after that the holi rite are end , 
 i 'll tell you larg of fair hero 's death . 
 meantim let wonder seem familiar , 
 and to the chapel let us present . 
 bene . soft and fair , friar . which is beatric ? 
 beat . [ unmask ] i answer to that name . what is your will ? 
 bene . do not you love me ? 
 beat . whi , no ; no more than reason . 
 bene . whi , then your uncl , and the princ , and claudio 
 have been deceiv ; for they swore you did . 
 beat . do not you love me ? 
 bene . troth , no ; no more than reason . 
 beat . whi , then my cousin , margaret , and ursula 
 are much deceiv 'd ; for they did swear you did . 
 bene . they swore that you were almost sick for me . 
 beat . they swore that you were well-nigh dead for me . 
 bene . 't is no such matter . then you do not love me ? 
 beat . no , truli , but in friendli recompens . 
 leon . come , cousin , i am sure you love the gentleman . 
 claud . and i 'll be sworn upo n't that he love her ; 
 for here 's a paper written in hi hand , 
 a halt sonnet of hi own pure brain , 
 fashion 'd to beatric . 
 hero . and here 's anoth , 
 writ in my cousin 's hand , stol'n from her pocket , 
 contain her affect unto benedick . 
 bene . a miracl ! here 's our own hand against our heart . 
 come , i will have thee ; but , by thi light , i take thee for piti . 
 beat . i would not deni you ; but , by thi good day , i yield upon 
 great persuas , and partli to save your life , for i wa told 
 you were in a consumpt . 
 bene . peac ! i will stop your mouth . [ kiss her . ] 
 beat . i 'll tell thee what , princ : a colleg of wit-crack can not 
 flout me out of my humour . dost thou think i care for a satir or 
 an epigram ? no . if a man will be beaten with brain , ' a shall 
 wear noth handsom about him . in brief , sinc i do purpos to 
 marri , i will think noth to ani purpos that the world can say 
 against it ; and therefor never flout at me for what i have said 
 against it ; for man is a giddi thing , and thi is my conclus . 
 for thi part , claudio , i did think to have beaten thee ; but in 
 that thou art like to be my kinsman , live unbrui 'd , and love my 
 cousin . 
 claud . i had well hop 'd thou wouldst have deni beatric , that i 
 might have cudgel 'd thee out of thi singl life , to make thee a 
 double-deal , which out of question thou wilt be if my cousin do 
 not look exceed narrowli to thee . 
 bene . come , come , we are friend . let 's have a danc ere we are 
 marri , that we may lighten our own heart and our wive ' heel . 
 leon . we 'll have danc afterward . 
 bene . first , of my word ! therefor play , music . princ , thou art 
 sad . get thee a wife , get thee a wife ! there is no staff more 
 rever than one tipp 'd with horn . 
 
 enter messeng . 
 
 mess . my lord , your brother john is ta'en in flight , 
 and brought with arm men back to messina . 
 bene . think not on him till to-morrow . i 'll devis thee brave 
 punish for him . strike up , piper ! 
 danc . [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 the tragedi of othello , moor of venic 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 king richard the second 
 john of gaunt , duke of lancast - uncl to the king 
 edmund langley , duke of york - uncl to the king 
 henri , surnam bolingbrok , duke of hereford , son of 
 john of gaunt , afterward king henri iv 
 duke of aumerl , son of the duke of york 
 thoma mowbray , duke of norfolk 
 duke of surrey 
 earl of salisburi 
 earl berkeley 
 bushi - favourit of king richard 
 bagot - `` `` `` `` 
 green - `` `` `` `` 
 earl of northumberland 
 henri perci , surnam hotspur , hi son 
 lord ross lord willoughbi 
 lord fitzwat bishop of carlisl 
 abbot of westminst lord marshal 
 sir stephen scroop sir pierc of exton 
 captain of a band of welshmen two garden 
 
 queen to king richard 
 duchess of york 
 duchess of gloucest , widow of thoma of woodstock , 
 duke of gloucest 
 ladi attend on the queen 
 
 lord , herald , offic , soldier , keeper , messeng , 
 groom , and other attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 england and wale 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter richard , john of gaunt , with other nobl and attend 
 
 king richard . old john of gaunt , time-honour lancast , 
 hast thou , accord to thi oath and band , 
 brought hither henri hereford , thi bold son , 
 here to make good the boist'rou late appeal , 
 which then our leisur would not let us hear , 
 against the duke of norfolk , thoma mowbray ? 
 gaunt . i have , my lieg . 
 king richard . tell me , moreov , hast thou sound him 
 if he appeal the duke on ancient malic , 
 or worthili , as a good subject should , 
 on some known ground of treacheri in him ? 
 gaunt . as near as i could sift him on that argument , 
 on some appar danger seen in him 
 aim 'd at your highness-no inveter malic . 
 king richard . then call them to our presenc : face to face 
 and frown brow to brow , ourselv will hear 
 the accus and the accus freeli speak . 
 high-stomach 'd are they both and full of ire , 
 in rage , deaf as the sea , hasti as fire . 
 
 enter bolingbrok and mowbray 
 
 bolingbrok . mani year of happi day befal 
 my graciou sovereign , my most love lieg ! 
 mowbray . each day still better other 's happi 
 until the heaven , envi earth 's good hap , 
 add an immort titl to your crown ! 
 king richard . we thank you both ; yet one but flatter us , 
 as well appeareth by the caus you come ; 
 name , to appeal each other of high treason . 
 cousin of hereford , what dost thou object 
 against the duke of norfolk , thoma mowbray ? 
 bolingbrok . first-heaven be the record to my speech ! 
 in the devot of a subject 's love , 
 tend'r the preciou safeti of my princ , 
 and free from other misbegotten hate , 
 come i appel to thi princ presenc . 
 now , thoma mowbray , do i turn to thee , 
 and mark my greet well ; for what i speak 
 my bodi shall make good upon thi earth , 
 or my divin soul answer it in heaven- 
 thou art a traitor and a miscreant , 
 too good to be so , and too bad to live , 
 sinc the more fair and crystal is the sky , 
 the uglier seem the cloud that in it fli . 
 onc more , the more to aggrav the note , 
 with a foul traitor 's name stuff i thi throat ; 
 and wish-so pleas my sovereign-er i move , 
 what my tongu speak , my right drawn sword may prove . 
 mowbray . let not my cold word here accus my zeal . 
 't is not the trial of a woman 's war , 
 the bitter clamour of two eager tongu , 
 can arbitr thi caus betwixt us twain ; 
 the blood is hot that must be cool 'd for thi . 
 yet can i not of such tame patienc boast 
 as to be hush 'd and nought at an to say . 
 first , the fair rever of your high curb me 
 from give rein and spur to my free speech ; 
 which els would post until it had return 'd 
 these term of treason doubl down hi throat . 
 set asid hi high blood 's royalti , 
 and let him be no kinsman to my lieg , 
 i do defi him , and i spit at him , 
 call him a slander coward and a villain ; 
 which to maintain , i would allow him odd 
 and meet him , were i tie to run afoot 
 even to the frozen ridg of the alp , 
 or ani other ground inhabit 
 where ever englishman durst set hi foot . 
 meantim let thi defend my loyalty- 
 by all my hope , most fals doth he lie 
 bolingbrok . pale trembl coward , there i throw my gage , 
 disclaim here the kindr of the king ; 
 and lay asid my high blood 's royalti , 
 which fear , not rever , make thee to except . 
 if guilti dread have left thee so much strength 
 as to take up mine honour 's pawn , then stoop . 
 by that and all the rite of knighthood els 
 will i make good against thee , arm to arm , 
 what i have spoke or thou canst worst devis . 
 mowbray . i take it up ; and by that sword i swear 
 which gentli laid my knighthood on my shoulder 
 i 'll answer thee in ani fair degre 
 or chivalr design of knightli trial ; 
 and when i mount , aliv may i not light 
 if i be traitor or unjustli fight ! 
 king richard . what doth our cousin lay to mowbray 's charg ? 
 it must be great that can inherit us 
 so much as of a thought of ill in him . 
 bolingbrok . look what i speak , my life shall prove it true- 
 that mowbray hath receiv 'd eight thousand nobl 
 in name of lend for your high ' soldier , 
 the which he hath detain 'd for lewd employ 
 like a fals traitor and injuri villain . 
 besid , i say and will in battl prove- 
 or here , or elsewher to the furthest verg 
 that ever wa survey 'd by english eye- 
 that all the treason for these eighteen year 
 complot and contriv in thi land 
 fetch from fals mowbray their first head and spring . 
 further i say , and further will maintain 
 upon hi bad life to make all thi good , 
 that he did plot the duke of gloucest 's death , 
 suggest hi soon-believ adversari , 
 and consequ , like a traitor coward , 
 sluic 'd out hi innoc soul through stream of blood ; 
 which blood , like sacrif abel 's , cri , 
 even from the tongueless cavern of the earth , 
 to me for justic and rough chastis ; 
 and , by the gloriou worth of my descent , 
 thi arm shall do it , or thi life be spent . 
 king richard . how high a pitch hi resolut soar ! 
 thoma of norfolk , what say'st thou to thi ? 
 mowbray . o , let my sovereign turn away hi face 
 and bid hi ear a littl while be deaf , 
 till i have told thi slander of hi blood 
 how god and good men hate so foul a liar . 
 king richard . mowbray , imparti are our eye and car . 
 were he my brother , nay , my kingdom 's heir , 
 as he is but my father 's brother 's son , 
 now by my sceptr 's awe i make a vow , 
 such neighbour near to our sacr blood 
 should noth privileg him nor partial 
 the unstoop firm of my upright soul . 
 he is our subject , mowbray ; so art thou : 
 free speech and fearless i to thee allow . 
 mowbray . then , bolingbrok , as low as to thi heart , 
 through the fals passag of thi throat , thou liest . 
 three part of that receipt i had for calai 
 disbur 'd i duli to hi high ' soldier ; 
 the other part reserv 'd i by consent , 
 for that my sovereign lieg wa in my debt 
 upon remaind of a dear account 
 sinc last i went to franc to fetch hi queen : 
 now swallow down that lie . for gloucest 's death- 
 i slew him not , but to my own disgrac 
 neglect my sworn duti in that case . 
 for you , my nobl lord of lancast , 
 the honour father to my foe , 
 onc did i lay an ambush for your life , 
 a trespass that doth vex my griev soul ; 
 but ere i last receiv 'd the sacrament 
 i did confess it , and exactli begg 'd 
 your grace 's pardon ; and i hope i had it . 
 thi is my fault . as for the rest appeal 'd , 
 it issu from the rancour of a villain , 
 a recreant and most degener traitor ; 
 which in myself i boldli will defend , 
 and interchang hurl down my gage 
 upon thi overween traitor 's foot 
 to prove myself a loyal gentleman 
 even in the best blood chamber 'd in hi bosom . 
 in hast whereof , most heartili i pray 
 your high to assign our trial day . 
 king richard . wrath-kindl gentlemen , be rul 'd by me ; 
 let 's purg thi choler without let blood- 
 thi we prescrib , though no physician ; 
 deep malic make too deep incis . 
 forget , forgiv ; conclud and be agre : 
 our doctor say thi is no month to bleed . 
 good uncl , let thi end where it begun ; 
 we 'll calm the duke of norfolk , you your son . 
 gaunt . to be a make-peac shall becom my age . 
 throw down , my son , the duke of norfolk 's gage . 
 king richard . and , norfolk , throw down hi . 
 gaunt . when , harri , when ? 
 obedi bid i should not bid again . 
 king richard . norfolk , throw down ; we bid . 
 there is no boot . 
 mowbray . myself i throw , dread sovereign , at thi foot ; 
 my life thou shalt command , but not my shame : 
 the one my duti owe ; but my fair name , 
 despit of death , that live upon my grave 
 to dark dishonour 's use thou shalt not have . 
 i am disgrac 'd , impeach 'd , and baffl 'd here ; 
 pierc 'd to the soul with slander 's venom 'd spear , 
 the which no balm can cure but hi heart-blood 
 which breath 'd thi poison . 
 king richard . rage must be withstood : 
 give me hi gage-lion make leopard tame . 
 mowbray . yea , but not chang hi spot . take but my shame , 
 and i resign my gage . my dear dear lord , 
 the purest treasur mortal time afford 
 is spotless reput ; that away , 
 men are but gild loam or paint clay . 
 a jewel in a ten-tim barr'd-up chest 
 is a bold spirit in a loyal breast . 
 mine honour is my life ; both grow in one ; 
 take honour from me , and my life is done : 
 then , dear my lieg , mine honour let me tri ; 
 in that i live , and for that will i die . 
 king richard . cousin , throw up your gage ; do you begin . 
 bolingbrok . o , god defend my soul from such deep sin ! 
 shall i seem crest-fallen in my father 's sight ? 
 or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height 
 befor thi outdar 'd dastard ? ere my tongu 
 shall wound my honour with such feebl wrong 
 or sound so base a parl , my teeth shall tear 
 the slavish motiv of recant fear , 
 and spit it bleed in hi high disgrac , 
 where shame doth harbour , even in mowbray 's face . 
 exit gaunt 
 king richard . we were not born to sue , but to command ; 
 which sinc we can not do to make you friend , 
 be readi , as your live shall answer it , 
 at coventri , upon saint lambert 's day . 
 there shall your sword and lanc arbitr 
 the swell differ of your settl hate ; 
 sinc we can not aton you , we shall see 
 justic design the victor 's chivalri . 
 lord marshal , command our officers-at-arm 
 be readi to direct these home alarm . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 london . the duke of lancast 's palac 
 
 enter john of gaunt with the duchess of gloucest 
 
 gaunt . ala , the part i had in woodstock 's blood 
 doth more solicit me than your exclaim 
 to stir against the butcher of hi life ! 
 but sinc correct lieth in those hand 
 which made the fault that we can not correct , 
 put we our quarrel to the will of heaven ; 
 who , when they see the hour ripe on earth , 
 will rain hot vengeanc on offend ' head . 
 duchess . find brotherhood in thee no sharper spur ? 
 hath love in thi old blood no live fire ? 
 edward 's seven son , whereof thyself art one , 
 were as seven vial of hi sacr blood , 
 or seven fair branch spring from one root . 
 some of those seven are dri by natur 's cours , 
 some of those branch by the destini cut ; 
 but thoma , my dear lord , my life , my gloucest , 
 one vial full of edward 's sacr blood , 
 one flourish branch of hi most royal root , 
 is crack 'd , and all the preciou liquor spilt ; 
 is hack 'd down , and hi summer leav all fade , 
 by envi 's hand and murder 's bloodi axe . 
 ah , gaunt , hi blood wa thine ! that bed , that womb , 
 that mettl , that self mould , that fashion 'd thee , 
 made him a man ; and though thou livest and breathest , 
 yet art thou slain in him . thou dost consent 
 in some larg measur to thi father 's death 
 in that thou seest thi wretch brother die , 
 who wa the model of thi father 's life . 
 call it not patienc , gaunt-it is despair ; 
 in suff'r thu thi brother to be slaught'r , 
 thou showest the nake pathway to thi life , 
 teach stern murder how to butcher thee . 
 that which in mean men we entitl patienc 
 is pale cold cowardic in nobl breast . 
 what shall i say ? to safeguard thine own life 
 the best way is to veng my gloucest 's death . 
 gaunt . god 's is the quarrel ; for god 's substitut , 
 hi deputi anoint in hi sight , 
 hath cau 'd hi death ; the which if wrong , 
 let heaven reveng ; for i may never lift 
 an angri arm against hi minist . 
 duchess . where then , ala , may i complain myself ? 
 gaunt . to god , the widow 's champion and defenc . 
 duchess . whi then , i will . farewel , old gaunt . 
 thou goest to coventri , there to behold 
 our cousin hereford and fell mowbray fight . 
 o , sit my husband 's wrong on hereford 's spear , 
 that it may enter butcher mowbray 's breast ! 
 or , if misfortun miss the first career , 
 be mowbray 's sin so heavi in hi bosom 
 that they may break hi foam courser 's back 
 and throw the rider headlong in the list , 
 a caitiff recreant to my cousin hereford ! 
 farewel , old gaunt ; thi sometim brother 's wife , 
 with her companion , grief , must end her life . 
 gaunt . sister , farewel ; i must to coventri . 
 as much good stay with thee as go with me ! 
 duchess . yet one word more- grief boundeth where it fall , 
 not with the empti hollow , but weight . 
 i take my leav befor i have begun , 
 for sorrow end not when it seemeth done . 
 commend me to thi brother , edmund york . 
 lo , thi is all- nay , yet depart not so ; 
 though thi be all , do not so quickli go ; 
 i shall rememb more . bid him- ah , what ? - 
 with all good speed at plashi visit me . 
 alack , and what shall good old york there see 
 but empti lodg and unfurnish 'd wall , 
 unpeopl offic , untrodden stone ? 
 and what hear there for welcom but my groan ? 
 therefor commend me ; let him not come there 
 to seek out sorrow that dwell everi where . 
 desol , desol , will i henc and die ; 
 the last leav of thee take my weep eye . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 the list at coventri 
 
 enter the lord marshal and the duke of aumerl 
 
 marshal . my lord aumerl , is harri hereford arm 'd ? 
 aumerl . yea , at all point ; and long to enter in . 
 marshal . the duke of norfolk , spight and bold , 
 stay but the summon of the appel 's trumpet . 
 aumerl . whi then , the champion are prepar 'd , and stay 
 for noth but hi majesti 's approach . 
 
 the trumpet sound , and the king enter with hi nobl , 
 gaunt , bushi , bagot , green , and other . when they are set , 
 enter mowbray , duke of nor folk , in arm , defend , and 
 a herald 
 
 king richard . marshal , demand of yonder champion 
 the caus of hi arriv here in arm ; 
 ask him hi name ; and orderli proceed 
 to swear him in the justic of hi caus . 
 marshal . in god 's name and the king 's , say who thou art , 
 and whi thou comest thu knightli clad in arm ; 
 against what man thou com'st , and what thi quarrel . 
 speak truli on thi knighthood and thi oath ; 
 as so defend thee heaven and thi valour ! 
 mowbray . my name is thoma mowbray , duke of norfolk ; 
 who hither come engag by my oath- 
 which god defend a knight should violat ! - 
 both to defend my loyalti and truth 
 to god , my king , and my succeed issu , 
 against the duke of hereford that appeal me ; 
 and , by the grace of god and thi mine arm , 
 to prove him , in defend of myself , 
 a traitor to my god , my king , and me . 
 and as i truli fight , defend me heaven ! 
 
 the trumpet sound . enter bolingbrok , duke of hereford , 
 appel , in armour , and a herald 
 
 king richard . marshal , ask yonder knight in arm , 
 both who he is and whi he cometh hither 
 thu plate in habili of war ; 
 and formal , accord to our law , 
 depos him in the justic of hi caus . 
 marshal . what is thi name ? and wherefor com'st thou hither 
 befor king richard in hi royal list ? 
 against whom comest thou ? and what 's thi quarrel ? 
 speak like a true knight , so defend thee heaven ! 
 bolingbrok . harri of hereford , lancast , and derbi , 
 am i ; who readi here do stand in arm 
 to prove , by god 's grace and my bodi 's valour , 
 in list on thoma mowbray , duke of norfolk , 
 that he is a traitor , foul and danger , 
 to god of heaven , king richard , and to me . 
 and as i truli fight , defend me heaven ! 
 marshal . on pain of death , no person be so bold 
 or daring-hardi as to touch the list , 
 except the marshal and such offic 
 appoint to direct these fair design . 
 bolingbrok . lord marshal , let me kiss my sovereign 's hand , 
 and bow my knee befor hi majesti ; 
 for mowbray and myself are like two men 
 that vow a long and weari pilgrimag . 
 then let us take a ceremoni leav 
 and love farewel of our sever friend . 
 marshal . the appel in all duti greet your high , 
 and crave to kiss your hand and take hi leav . 
 king richard . we will descend and fold him in our arm . 
 cousin of hereford , as thi caus is right , 
 so be thi fortun in thi royal fight ! 
 farewel , my blood ; which if to-day thou shed , 
 lament we may , but not reveng thee dead . 
 bolingbrok . o , let no nobl eye profan a tear 
 for me , if i be gor 'd with mowbray 's spear . 
 as confid as is the falcon 's flight 
 against a bird , do i with mowbray fight . 
 my love lord , i take my leav of you ; 
 of you , my nobl cousin , lord aumerl ; 
 not sick , although i have to do with death , 
 but lusti , young , and cheerli draw breath . 
 lo , as at english feast , so i regreet 
 the daintiest last , to make the end most sweet . 
 o thou , the earthli author of my blood , 
 whose youth spirit , in me regener , 
 doth with a twofold vigour lift me up 
 to reach at victori abov my head , 
 add proof unto mine armour with thi prayer , 
 and with thi bless steel my lanc 's point , 
 that it may enter mowbray 's waxen coat 
 and furbish new the name of john o ' gaunt , 
 even in the lusti haviour of hi son . 
 gaunt . god in thi good caus make thee prosper ! 
 be swift like lightn in the execut , 
 and let thi blow , doubli redoubl , 
 fall like amaz thunder on the casqu 
 of thi advers pernici enemi . 
 rous up thi youth blood , be valiant , and live . 
 bolingbrok . mine innoc and saint georg to thrive ! 
 mowbray . howev god or fortun cast my lot , 
 there live or die , true to king richard 's throne , 
 a loyal , just , and upright gentleman . 
 never did captiv with a freer heart 
 cast off hi chain of bondag , and embrac 
 hi golden uncontrol 'd enfranchis , 
 more than my danc soul doth celebr 
 thi feast of battl with mine adversari . 
 most mighti lieg , and my companion peer , 
 take from my mouth the wish of happi year . 
 as gentl and as jocund as to jest 
 go i to fight : truth hath a quiet breast . 
 king richard . farewel , my lord , secur i espi 
 virtu with valour couch in thine eye . 
 order the trial , marshal , and begin . 
 marshal . harri of hereford , lancast , and derbi , 
 receiv thi lanc ; and god defend the right ! 
 bolingbrok . strong as a tower in hope , i cri amen . 
 marshal . [ to an offic ] go bear thi lanc to thoma , 
 duke of norfolk . 
 first herald . harri of hereford , lancast , and derbi , 
 stand here for god , hi sovereign , and himself , 
 on pain to be found fals and recreant , 
 to prove the duke of norfolk , thoma mowbray , 
 a traitor to hi god , hi king , and him ; 
 and dare him to set forward to the fight . 
 second herald . here standeth thoma mowbray , duke of norfolk , 
 on pain to be found fals and recreant , 
 both to defend himself , and to approv 
 henri of hereford , lancast , and derbi , 
 to god , hi sovereign , and to him disloy , 
 courag and with a free desir 
 attend but the signal to begin . 
 marshal . sound trumpet ; and set forward , combat . 
 [ a charg sound ] 
 stay , the king hath thrown hi warder down . 
 king richard . let them lay by their helmet and their spear , 
 and both return back to their chair again . 
 withdraw with us ; and let the trumpet sound 
 while we return these duke what we decre . 
 
 a long flourish , while the king consult hi council 
 
 draw near , 
 and list what with our council we have done . 
 for that our kingdom 's earth should not be soil 'd 
 with that dear blood which it hath foster ; 
 and for our eye do hate the dire aspect 
 of civil wound plough 'd up with neighbour ' sword ; 
 and for we think the eagle-wing pride 
 of sky-aspir and ambiti thought , 
 with rival-h envi , set on you 
 to wake our peac , which in our countri 's cradl 
 draw the sweet infant breath of gentl sleep ; 
 which so rou 'd up with boist'rou untun 'd drum , 
 with harsh-resound trumpet ' dread bray , 
 and grate shock of wrath iron arm , 
 might from our quiet confin fright fair peac 
 and make us wade even in our kindr 's blood- 
 therefor we banish you our territori . 
 you , cousin hereford , upon pain of life , 
 till twice five summer have enrich 'd our field 
 shall not regreet our fair dominion , 
 but tread the stranger path of banish . 
 bolingbrok . your will be done . thi must my comfort be- 
 that sun that warm you here shall shine on me , 
 and those hi golden beam to you here lent 
 shall point on me and gild my banish . 
 king richard . norfolk , for thee remain a heavier doom , 
 which i with some unwilling pronounc : 
 the sli slow hour shall not determin 
 the dateless limit of thi dear exil ; 
 the hopeless word of 'never to return ' 
 breath i against thee , upon pain of life . 
 mowbray . a heavi sentenc , my most sovereign lieg , 
 and all unlook 'd for from your high ' mouth . 
 a dearer merit , not so deep a maim 
 as to be cast forth in the common air , 
 have i deserv at your high ' hand . 
 the languag i have learnt these forti year , 
 my nativ english , now i must forgo ; 
 and now my tongu 's use is to me no more 
 than an unstring viol or a harp ; 
 or like a cun instrument ca 'd up 
 or , be open , put into hi hand 
 that know no touch to tune the harmoni . 
 within my mouth you have engaol 'd my tongu , 
 doubli portculli 'd with my teeth and lip ; 
 and dull , unfeel , barren ignor 
 is made my gaoler to attend on me . 
 i am too old to fawn upon a nurs , 
 too far in year to be a pupil now . 
 what is thi sentenc , then , but speechless death , 
 which rob my tongu from breath nativ breath ? 
 king richard . it boot thee not to be compassion ; 
 after our sentenc plain come too late . 
 mowbray . then thu i turn me from my countrv 's light , 
 to dwell in solemn shade of endless night . 
 king richard . return again , and take an oath with thee . 
 lay on our royal sword your banish 'd hand ; 
 swear by the duti that you owe to god , 
 our part therein we banish with yourselv , 
 to keep the oath that we administ : 
 you never shall , so help you truth and god , 
 embrac each other 's love in banish ; 
 nor never look upon each other 's face ; 
 nor never write , regreet , nor reconcil 
 thi lour tempest of your home-br hate ; 
 nor never by advis purpos meet 
 to plot , contriv , or complot ani ill , 
 'gainst us , our state , our subject , or our land . 
 bolingbrok . i swear . 
 mowbray . and i , to keep all thi . 
 bolingbrok . norfolk , so far as to mine enemi . 
 by thi time , had the king permit us , 
 one of our soul had wand'r in the air , 
 banish 'd thi frail sepulchr of our flesh , 
 as now our flesh is banish 'd from thi land- 
 confess thi treason ere thou fli the realm ; 
 sinc thou hast far to go , bear not along 
 the clog burden of a guilti soul . 
 mowbray . no , bolingbrok ; if ever i were traitor , 
 my name be blot from the book of life , 
 and i from heaven banish 'd as from henc ! 
 but what thou art , god , thou , and i , do know ; 
 and all too soon , i fear , the king shall rue . 
 farewel , my lieg . now no way can i stray : 
 save back to england , an the world 's my way . exit 
 king richard . uncl , even in the glass of thine eye 
 i see thi griev heart . thi sad aspect 
 hath from the number of hi banish 'd year 
 pluck 'd four away . [ to bolingbrok ] six frozen winter spent , 
 return with welcom home from banish . 
 bolingbrok . how long a time lie in one littl word ! 
 four lag winter and four wanton spring 
 end in a word : such is the breath of king . 
 gaunt . i thank my lieg that in regard of me 
 he shorten four year of my son 's exil ; 
 but littl vantag shall i reap therebi , 
 for ere the six year that he hath to spend 
 can chang their moon and bring their time about , 
 my oil-dri lamp and time-bewast light 
 shall be extinct with age and endless night ; 
 my inch of taper will be burnt and done , 
 and blindfold death not let me see my son . 
 king richard . whi , uncl , thou hast mani year to live . 
 gaunt . but not a minut , king , that thou canst give : 
 shorten my day thou canst with sullen sorrow 
 and pluck night from me , but not lend a morrow ; 
 thou can'st help time to furrow me with age , 
 but stop no wrinkl in hi pilgrimag ; 
 thi word is current with him for my death , 
 but dead , thi kingdom can not buy my breath . 
 king richard . thi son is banish 'd upon good advic , 
 whereto thi tongu a party-verdict gave . 
 whi at our justic seem'st thou then to lour ? 
 gaunt . thing sweet to tast prove in digest sour . 
 you urg 'd me as a judg ; but i had rather 
 you would have bid me argu like a father . 
 o , had it been a stranger , not my child , 
 to smooth hi fault i should have been more mild . 
 a partial slander sought i to avoid , 
 and in the sentenc my own life destroy 'd . 
 ala , i look 'd when some of you should say 
 i wa too strict to make mine own away ; 
 but you gave leav to my unwil tongu 
 against my will to do myself thi wrong . 
 king richard . cousin , farewel ; and , uncl , bid him so . 
 six year we banish him , and he shall go . 
 flourish . exit king with train 
 aumerl . cousin , farewel ; what presenc must not know , 
 from where you do remain let paper show . 
 marshal . my lord , no leav take i , for i will ride 
 as far as land will let me by your side . 
 gaunt . o , to what purpos dost thou hoard thi word , 
 that thou returnest no greet to thi friend ? 
 bolingbrok . i have too few to take my leav of you , 
 when the tongu 's offic should be prodig 
 to breath the abund dolour of the heart . 
 gaunt . thi grief is but thi absenc for a time . 
 bolingbrok . joy absent , grief is present for that time . 
 gaunt . what is six winter ? they are quickli gone . 
 bolingbrok . to men in joy ; but grief make one hour ten . 
 gaunt . call it a travel that thou tak'st for pleasur . 
 bolingbrok . my heart will sigh when i miscal it so , 
 which find it an enforc pilgrimag . 
 gaunt . the sullen passag of thi weari step 
 esteem as foil wherein thou art to set 
 the preciou jewel of thi home return . 
 bolingbrok . nay , rather , everi tediou stride i make 
 will but rememb me what a deal of world 
 i wander from the jewel that i love . 
 must i not serv a long apprenticehood 
 to foreign passag ; and in the end , 
 have my freedom , boast of noth els 
 but that i wa a journeyman to grief ? 
 gaunt . all place that the eye of heaven visit 
 are to a wise man port and happi haven . 
 teach thi necess to reason thu : 
 there is no virtu like necess . 
 think not the king did banish thee , 
 but thou the king . woe doth the heavier sit 
 where it perceiv it is but faintli home . 
 go , say i sent thee forth to purchas honour , 
 and not the king exil 'd thee ; or suppos 
 devour pestil hang in our air 
 and thou art fli to a fresher clime . 
 look what thi soul hold dear , imagin it 
 to lie that way thou goest , not whenc thou com'st . 
 suppos the sing bird musician , 
 the grass whereon thou tread'st the presenc strew 'd , 
 the flower fair ladi , and thi step no more 
 than a delight measur or a danc ; 
 for gnarl sorrow hath less power to bite 
 the man that mock at it and set it light . 
 bolingbrok . o , who can hold a fire in hi hand 
 by think on the frosti caucasu ? 
 or cloy the hungri edg of appetit 
 by bare imagin of a feast ? 
 or wallow nake in decemb snow 
 by think on fantast summer 's heat ? 
 o , no ! the apprehens of the good 
 give but the greater feel to the wors . 
 fell sorrow 's tooth doth never rankl more 
 than when he bite , but lanceth not the sore . 
 gaunt . come , come , my son , i 'll bring thee on thi way . 
 had i thi youtli and caus , i would not stay . 
 bolingbrok . then , england 's ground , farewel ; sweet soil , adieu ; 
 my mother , and my nurs , that bear me yet ! 
 where' i wander , boast of thi i can : 
 though banish 'd , yet a trueborn english man . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 london . the court 
 
 enter the king , with bagot and green , at one door ; 
 and the duke of aumerl at anoth 
 
 king richard . we did observ . cousin aumerl , 
 how far brought you high hereford on hi way ? 
 aumerl . i brought high hereford , if you call him so , 
 but to the next high way , and there i left him . 
 king richard . and say , what store of part tear were shed ? 
 aumerl . faith , none for me ; except the north-east wind , 
 which then blew bitterli against our face , 
 awak 'd the sleep rheum , and so by chanc 
 did grace our hollow part with a tear . 
 king richard . what said our cousin when you part with him ? 
 aumerl . 'farewel . ' 
 and , for my heart disdain that my tongu 
 should so profan the word , that taught me craft 
 to counterfeit oppress of such grief 
 that word seem 'd buri in my sorrow 's grave . 
 marri , would the word 'farewel ' have length'n hour 
 and ad year to hi short banish , 
 he should have had a volum of farewel ; 
 but sinc it would not , he had none of me . 
 king richard . he is our cousin , cousin ; but 't is doubt , 
 when time shall call him home from banish , 
 whether our kinsman come to see hi friend . 
 ourself , and bushi , bagot here , and green , 
 observ 'd hi courtship to the common peopl ; 
 how he did seem to dive into their heart 
 with humbl and familiar courtesi ; 
 what rever he did throw away on slave , 
 woo poor craftsmen with the craft of smile 
 and patient underbear of hi fortun , 
 as 'twere to banish their affect with him . 
 off goe hi bonnet to an oyster-wench ; 
 a brace of draymen bid god speed him well 
 and had the tribut of hi suppl knee , 
 with 'thank , my countrymen , my love friend ' ; 
 as were our england in revers hi , 
 and he our subject ' next degre in hope . 
 green . well , he is gone ; and with him go these thought ! 
 now for the rebel which stand out in ireland , 
 expedi manag must be made , my lieg , 
 ere further leisur yicld them further mean 
 for their advantag and your high ' loss . 
 king richard . we will ourself in person to thi war ; 
 and , for our coffer , with too great a court 
 and liber largess , are grown somewhat light , 
 we are enforc 'd to farm our royal realm ; 
 the revenu whereof shall furnish us 
 for our affair in hand . if that come short , 
 our substitut at home shall have blank charter ; 
 whereto , when they shall know what men are rich , 
 they shall subscrib them for larg sum of gold , 
 and send them after to suppli our want ; 
 for we will make for ireland present . 
 
 enter bushi 
 
 bushi , what news ? 
 bushi . old john of gaunt is grievou sick , my lord , 
 suddenli taken ; and hath sent poste-hast 
 to entreat your majesti to visit him . 
 king richard . where lie he ? 
 bushi . at eli hous . 
 king richard . now put it , god , in the physician 's mind 
 to help him to hi grave immedi ! 
 the line of hi coffer shall make coat 
 to deck our soldier for these irish war . 
 come , gentlemen , let 's all go visit him . 
 pray god we may make hast , and come too late ! 
 all . amen . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 london . eli hous 
 
 enter john of gaunt , sick , with the duke of york , etc . 
 
 gaunt . will the king come , that i may breath my last 
 in wholesom counsel to hi unstaid youth ? 
 york . vex not yourself , nor strive not with your breath ; 
 for all in vain come counsel to hi ear . 
 gaunt . o , but they say the tongu of die men 
 enforc attent like deep harmoni . 
 where word are scarc , they are seldom spent in vain ; 
 for they breath truth that breath their word -in pain . 
 he that no more must say is listen 'd more 
 than they whom youth and eas have taught to glose ; 
 more are men 's end mark 'd than their live befor . 
 the set sun , and music at the close , 
 as the last tast of sweet , is sweetest last , 
 writ in remembr more than thing long past . 
 though richard my life 's counsel would not hear , 
 my death 's sad tale may yet undeaf hi ear . 
 york . no ; it is stopp 'd with other flatter sound , 
 as prais , of whose tast the wise are fond , 
 lascivi metr , to whose venom sound 
 the open ear of youth doth alway listen ; 
 report of fashion in proud itali , 
 whose manner still our tardi apish nation 
 limp after in base imit . 
 where doth the world thrust forth a vanity- 
 so it be new , there 's no respect how vile- 
 that is not quickli buzz 'd into hi ear ? 
 then all too late come counsel to be heard 
 where will doth mutini with wit 's regard . 
 direct not him whose way himself will choos . 
 't is breath thou lack'st , and that breath wilt thou lose . 
 gaunt . methink i am a prophet new inspir 'd , 
 and thu expir do foretel of him : 
 hi rash fierc blaze of riot can not last , 
 for violent fire soon burn out themselv ; 
 small shower last long , but sudden storm are short ; 
 he tire betim that spur too fast betim ; 
 with eager feed food doth choke the feeder ; 
 light vaniti , insati cormor , 
 consum mean , soon prey upon itself . 
 thi royal throne of king , thi scept'r isl , 
 thi earth of majesti , thi seat of mar , 
 thi other eden , demi-paradis , 
 thi fortress built by natur for herself 
 against infect and the hand of war , 
 thi happi breed of men , thi littl world , 
 thi preciou stone set in the silver sea , 
 which serv it in the offic of a wall , 
 or as a moat defens to a hous , 
 against the envi of less happier land ; 
 thi bless plot , thi earth , thi realm , thi england , 
 thi nurs , thi teem womb of royal king , 
 fear 'd by their breed , and famou by their birth , 
 renown for their deed as far from home , 
 for christian servic and true chivalri , 
 as is the sepulchr in stubborn jewri 
 of the world 's ransom , bless mari 's son ; 
 thi land of such dear soul , thi dear dear land , 
 dear for her reput through the world , 
 is now lea 'd out-i die pronounc it- 
 like to a tenement or pelt farm . 
 england , bound in with the triumphant sea , 
 whose rocki shore beat back the enviou sieg 
 of wat'ri neptun , is now bound in with shame , 
 with inki blot and rotten parchment bond ; 
 that england , that wa wont to conquer other , 
 hath made a shame conquest of itself . 
 ah , would the scandal vanish with my life , 
 how happi then were my ensu death ! 
 
 enter king and queen , aumerl , bushi , green , bagot , 
 ross , and willoughbi 
 
 york . the king is come ; deal mildli with hi youth , 
 for young hot colt be rag 'd do rage the more . 
 queen . how fare our nobl uncl lancast ? 
 king richard . what comfort , man ? how is't with age gaunt ? 
 gaunt . o , how that name befit my composit ! 
 old gaunt , inde ; and gaunt in be old . 
 within me grief hath kept a tediou fast ; 
 and who abstain from meat that is not gaunt ? 
 for sleep england long time have i watch 'd ; 
 watch breed lean , lean is an gaunt . 
 the pleasur that some father feed upon 
 is my strict fast-i mean my children 's look ; 
 and therein fast , hast thou made me gaunt . 
 gaunt am i for the grave , gaunt as a grave , 
 whose hollow womb inherit nought but bone . 
 king richard . can sick men play so nice with their name ? 
 gaunt . no , miseri make sport to mock itself : 
 sinc thou dost seek to kill my name in me , 
 i mock my name , great king , to flatter thee . 
 king richard . should die men flatter with those that live ? 
 gaunt . no , no ; men live flatter those that die . 
 king richard . thou , now a-di , sayest thou flatterest me . 
 gaunt . o , no ! thou diest , though i the sicker be . 
 king richard . i am in health , i breath , and see thee ill. 
 gaunt . now he that made me know i see thee ill ; 
 ill in myself to see , and in thee see ill. 
 thi death-b is no lesser than thi land 
 wherein thou liest in reput sick ; 
 and thou , too careless patient as thou art , 
 commit'st thi anoint bodi to the cure 
 of those physician that first wound thee : 
 a thousand flatter sit within thi crown , 
 whose compass is no bigger than thi head ; 
 and yet , incag in so small a verg , 
 the wast is no whit lesser than thi land . 
 o , had thi grandsir with a prophet 's eye 
 seen how hi son 's son should destroy hi son , 
 from forth thi reach he would have laid thi shame , 
 depos thee befor thou wert possess 'd , 
 which art possess 'd now to depos thyself . 
 whi , cousin , wert thou regent of the world , 
 it were a shame to let thi land by leas ; 
 but for thi world enjoy but thi land , 
 is it not more than shame to shame it so ? 
 landlord of england art thou now , not king . 
 thi state of law is bondslav to the law ; 
 and thou- 
 king richard . a lunat lean-wit fool , 
 presum on an agu 's privileg , 
 darest with thi frozen admonit 
 make pale our cheek , chase the royal blood 
 with furi from hi nativ resid . 
 now by my seat 's right royal majesti , 
 wert thou not brother to great edward 's son , 
 thi tongu that run so roundli in thi head 
 should run thi head from thi unrever shoulder . 
 gaunt . o , spare me not , my brother edward 's son , 
 for that i wa hi father edward 's son ; 
 that blood alreadi , like the pelican , 
 hast thou tapp 'd out , and drunkenli carou 'd . 
 my brother gloucest , plain well-mean soul- 
 whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happi soul ! - 
 may be a preced and wit good 
 that thou respect'st not spill edward 's blood . 
 join with the present sick that i have ; 
 and thi unkind be like crook age , 
 to crop at onc a too long wither flower . 
 live in thi shame , but die not shame with thee ! 
 these word hereaft thi tormentor be ! 
 convey me to my bed , then to my grave . 
 love they to live that love and honour have . 
 exit , born out by hi attend 
 king richard . and let them die that age and sullen have ; 
 for both hast thou , and both becom the grave . 
 york . i do beseech your majesti imput hi word 
 to wayward sickli and age in him . 
 he love you , on my life , and hold you dear 
 as harri duke of hereford , were he here . 
 king richard . right , you say true : as hereford 's love , so hi ; 
 as their , so mine ; and all be as it is . 
 
 enter northumberland 
 
 northumberland . my lieg , old gaunt commend him to your majesti . 
 king richard . what say he ? 
 northumberland . nay , noth ; all is said . 
 hi tongu is now a stringless instrument ; 
 word , life , and all , old lancast hath spent . 
 york . be york the next that must be bankrupt so ! 
 though death be poor , it end a mortal woe . 
 king richard . the ripest fruit first fall , and so doth he ; 
 hi time is spent , our pilgrimag must be . 
 so much for that . now for our irish war . 
 we must supplant those rough rug-head kern , 
 which live like venom where no venom els 
 but onli they have privileg to live . 
 and for these great affair do ask some charg , 
 toward our assist we do seiz to us 
 the plate , coin , revenu , and moveabl , 
 whereof our uncl gaunt did stand possess 'd . 
 york . how long shall i be patient ? ah , how long 
 shall tender duti make me suffer wrong ? 
 not gloucest 's death , nor hereford 's banish , 
 nor gaunt 's rebuk , nor england 's privat wrong , 
 nor the prevent of poor bolingbrok 
 about hi marriag , nor my own disgrac , 
 have ever made me sour my patient cheek 
 or bend one wrinkl on my sovereign 's face . 
 i am the last of nobl edward 's son , 
 of whom thi father , princ of wale , wa first . 
 in war wa never lion rag 'd more fierc , 
 in peac wa never gentl lamb more mild , 
 than wa that young and princ gentleman . 
 hi face thou hast , for even so look 'd he , 
 accomplish 'd with the number of thi hour ; 
 but when he frown 'd , it wa against the french 
 and not against hi friend . hi nobl hand 
 did win what he did spend , and spent not that 
 which hi triumphant father 's hand had won . 
 hi hand were guilti of no kindr blood , 
 but bloodi with the enemi of hi kin . 
 o richard ! york is too far gone with grief , 
 or els he never would compar between- 
 king richard . whi , uncl , what 's the matter ? 
 york . o my lieg , 
 pardon me , if you pleas ; if not , i , plea 'd 
 not to be pardon , am content withal . 
 seek you to seiz and gripe into your hand 
 the royalti and right of banish 'd hereford ? 
 is not gaunt dead ? and doth not hereford live ? 
 wa not gaunt just ? and is not harri true ? 
 did not the one deserv to have an heir ? 
 is not hi heir a well-deserv son ? 
 take hereford 's right away , and take from time 
 hi charter and hi customari right ; 
 let not to-morrow then ensu to-day ; 
 be not thyself-for how art thou a king 
 but by fair sequenc and success ? 
 now , afor god-god forbid i say true ! - 
 if you do wrong seiz hereford 's right , 
 call in the letter patent that he hath 
 by hi attorneys-gener to sue 
 hi liveri , and deni hi off'r homag , 
 you pluck a thousand danger on your head , 
 you lose a thousand well-dispos heart , 
 and prick my tender patienc to those thought 
 which honour and allegi can not think . 
 king richard . think what you will , we seiz into our hand 
 hi plate , hi good , hi money , and hi land . 
 york . i 'll not be by the while . my lieg , farewel . 
 what will ensu hereof there 's none can tell ; 
 but by bad cours may be understood 
 that their event can never fall out good . exit 
 king richard . go , bushi , to the earl of wiltshir straight ; 
 bid him repair to us to eli hous 
 to see thi busi . to-morrow next 
 we will for ireland ; and 't is time , i trow . 
 and we creat , in absenc of ourself , 
 our uncl york lord governor of england ; 
 for he is just , and alway lov 'd us well . 
 come on , our queen ; to-morrow must we part ; 
 be merri , for our time of stay is short . 
 flourish . exeunt king , queen , bushi , aumerl , 
 green , and bagot 
 northumberland . well , lord , the duke of lancast is dead . 
 ross . and live too ; for now hi son is duke . 
 willoughbi . bare in titl , not in revenu . 
 northumberland . richli in both , if justic had her right . 
 ross . my heart is great ; but it must break with silenc , 
 ere't be disburden with a liber tongu . 
 northumberland . nay , speak thi mind ; and let him ne'er speak more 
 that speak thi word again to do thee harm ! 
 willoughbi . tend that thou wouldst speak to the duke of hereford ? 
 if it be so , out with it boldli , man ; 
 quick is mine ear to hear of good toward him . 
 ross . no good at all that i can do for him ; 
 unless you call it good to piti him , 
 bereft and geld of hi patrimoni . 
 northumberland . now , afor god , 't is shame such wrong are born 
 in him , a royal princ , and mani moe 
 of nobl blood in thi declin land . 
 the king is not himself , but base led 
 by flatter ; and what they will inform , 
 mere in hate , 'gainst ani of us an , 
 that will the king sever prosecut 
 'gainst us , our live , our children , and our heir . 
 ross . the common hath he pill 'd with grievou tax ; 
 and quit lost their heart ; the nobl hath he find 
 for ancient quarrel and quit lost their heart . 
 willoughbi . and daili new exact are devi 'd , 
 as blank , benevol , and i wot not what ; 
 but what , a god 's name , doth becom of thi ? 
 northumberland . war hath not wast it , for warr 'd he hath not , 
 but base yield upon compromis 
 that which hi nobl ancestor achiev 'd with blow . 
 more hath he spent in peac than they in war . 
 ross . the earl of wiltshir hath the realm in farm . 
 willoughbi . the king 's grown bankrupt like a broken man . 
 northumberland . reproach and dissolut hangeth over him . 
 ross . he hath not money for these irish war , 
 hi burden taxat notwithstand , 
 but by the rob of the banish 'd duke . 
 northumberland . hi nobl kinsman-most degener king ! 
 but , lord , we hear thi fear tempest sing , 
 yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm ; 
 we see the wind sit sore upon our sail , 
 and yet we strike not , but secur perish . 
 ross . we see the veri wreck that we must suffer ; 
 and unavoid is the danger now 
 for suffer so the caus of our wreck . 
 northumberland . not so ; even through the hollow eye of death 
 i spi life peer ; but i dare not say 
 how near the tide of our comfort is . 
 willoughbi . nay , let us share thi thought as thou dost our . 
 ross . be confid to speak , northumberland . 
 we three are but thyself , and , speak so , 
 thi word are but as thought ; therefor be bold . 
 northumberland . then thu : i have from le port blanc , a bay 
 in brittani , receiv 'd intellig 
 that harri duke of hereford , rainold lord cobham , 
 that late broke from the duke of exet , 
 hi brother , archbishop late of canterburi , 
 sir thoma erpingham , sir john ramston , 
 sir john norberi , sir robert waterton , and franci quoint- 
 all these , well furnish 'd by the duke of britain , 
 with eight tall ship , three thousand men of war , 
 are make hither with all due expedi , 
 and shortli mean to touch our northern shore . 
 perhap they had ere thi , but that they stay 
 the first depart of the king for ireland . 
 if then we shall shake off our slavish yoke , 
 imp out our droop countri 's broken wing , 
 redeem from broke pawn the blemish 'd crown , 
 wipe off the dust that hide our sceptr 's gilt , 
 and make high majesti look like itself , 
 away with me in post to ravenspurgh ; 
 but if you faint , as fear to do so , 
 stay and be secret , and myself will go . 
 ross . to hors , to hors ! urg doubt to them that fear . 
 willoughbi . hold out my hors , and i will first be there . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 windsor castl 
 
 enter queen , bushi , and bagot 
 
 bushi . madam , your majesti is too much sad . 
 you promi 'd , when you part with the king , 
 to lay asid life-harm heavi 
 and entertain a cheer disposit . 
 queen . to pleas the king , i did ; to pleas myself 
 i can not do it ; yet i know no caus 
 whi i should welcom such a guest as grief , 
 save bid farewel to so sweet a guest 
 as my sweet richard . yet again methink 
 some unborn sorrow , ripe in fortun 's womb , 
 is come toward me , and my inward soul 
 with noth trembl . at some thing it griev 
 more than with part from my lord the king . 
 bushi . each substanc of a grief hath twenti shadow , 
 which show like grief itself , but is not so ; 
 for sorrow 's eye , glaze with blind tear , 
 divid one thing entir to mani object , 
 like perspect which , rightli gaz 'd upon , 
 show noth but confusion-ey 'd awri , 
 distinguish form . so your sweet majesti , 
 look awri upon your lord 's departur , 
 find shape of grief more than himself to wail ; 
 which , look 'd on as it is , is nought but shadow 
 of what it is not . then , thrice-graci queen , 
 more than your lord 's departur weep not-mor is not seen ; 
 or if it be , 't is with fals sorrow 's eye , 
 which for thing true weep thing imaginari . 
 queen . it may be so ; but yet my inward soul 
 persuad me it is otherwis . howe' it be , 
 i can not but be sad ; so heavi sad 
 as-though , on think , on no thought i think- 
 make me with heavi noth faint and shrink . 
 bushi . 't is noth but conceit , my graciou ladi . 
 queen . 't is noth less : conceit is still deriv 'd 
 from some forefath grief ; mine is not so , 
 for noth hath begot my someth grief , 
 or someth hath the noth that i griev ; 
 't is in revers that i do possess- 
 but what it is that is not yet known what , 
 i can not name ; 't is nameless woe , i wot . 
 
 enter green 
 
 green . god save your majesti ! and well met , gentlemen . 
 i hope the king is not yet shipp 'd for ireland . 
 queen . whi hopest thou so ? 't is better hope he is ; 
 for hi design crave hast , hi hast good hope . 
 then wherefor dost thou hope he is not shipp 'd ? 
 green . that he , our hope , might have retir 'd hi power 
 and driven into despair an enemi 's hope 
 who strongli hath set foot in thi land . 
 the banish 'd bolingbrok repeal himself , 
 and with uplift arm is safe arriv 'd 
 at ravenspurgh . 
 queen . now god in heaven forbid ! 
 green . ah , madam , 't is too true ; and that is wors , 
 the lord northumberland , hi son young henri perci , 
 the lord of ross , beaumond , and willoughbi , 
 with all their power friend , are fled to him . 
 bushi . whi have you not proclaim 'd northumberland 
 and all the rest revolt faction traitor ? 
 green . we have ; whereupon the earl of worcest 
 hath broken hi staff , resign 'd hi stewardship , 
 and all the household servant fled with him 
 to bolingbrok . 
 queen . so , green , thou art the midwif to my woe , 
 and bolingbrok my sorrow 's dismal heir . 
 now hath my soul brought forth her prodigi ; 
 and i , a gasp new-deliv 'd mother , 
 have woe to woe , sorrow to sorrow join 'd . 
 bushi . despair not , madam . 
 queen . who shall hinder me ? 
 i will despair , and be at enmiti 
 with cozen hope-h is a flatter , 
 a parasit , a keeper-back of death , 
 who gentli would dissolv the band of life , 
 which fals hope linger in extrem . 
 
 enter york 
 
 green . here come the duke of york . 
 queen . with sign of war about hi age neck . 
 o , full of care busi are hi look ! 
 uncl , for god 's sake , speak comfort word . 
 york . should i do so , i should beli my thought . 
 comfort 's in heaven ; and we are on the earth , 
 where noth live but cross , care , and grief . 
 your husband , he is gone to save far off , 
 whilst other come to make him lose at home . 
 here am i left to underprop hi land , 
 who , weak with age , can not support myself . 
 now come the sick hour that hi surfeit made ; 
 now shall he tri hi friend that flatter 'd him . 
 
 enter a servingman 
 
 servingman . my lord , your son wa gone befor i came . 
 york . he was-whi so go all which way it will ! 
 the nobl they are fled , the common they are cold 
 and will , i fear , revolt on hereford 's side . 
 sirrah , get thee to plashi , to my sister gloucest ; 
 bid her send me present a thousand pound . 
 hold , take my ring . 
 servingman . my lord , i had forgot to tell your lordship , 
 to-day , as i came by , i call there- 
 but i shall griev you to report the rest . 
 york . what is't , knave ? 
 servingman . an hour befor i came , the duchess die . 
 york . god for hi merci ! what a tide of woe 
 come rush on thi woeful land at onc ! 
 i know not what to do . i would to god , 
 so my untruth had not provok 'd him to it , 
 the king had cut off my head with my brother 's . 
 what , are there no post dispatch 'd for ireland ? 
 how shall we do for money for these war ? 
 come , sister-cousin , i would say-pray , pardon me . 
 go , fellow , get thee home , provid some cart , 
 and bring away the armour that is there . 
 exit servingman 
 gentlemen , will you go muster men ? 
 if i know how or which way to order these affair 
 thu disorderli thrust into my hand , 
 never believ me . both are my kinsmen . 
 t'one is my sovereign , whom both my oath 
 and duti bid defend ; t'other again 
 is my kinsman , whom the king hath wrong 'd , 
 whom conscienc and my kindr bid to right . 
 well , somewhat we must do.-com , cousin , 
 i 'll dispos of you . gentlemen , go muster up your men 
 and meet me present at berkeley . 
 i should to plashi too , 
 but time will not permit . all is uneven , 
 and everyth is left at six and seven . 
 exeunt york and queen 
 bushi . the wind sit fair for news to go to ireland . 
 but none return . for us to levi power 
 proportion to the enemi 
 is all unposs . 
 green . besid , our near to the king in love 
 is near the hate of those love not the king . 
 bagot . and that is the waver common ; for their love 
 lie in their purs ; and whoso empti them , 
 by so much fill their heart with deadli hate . 
 bushi . wherein the king stand gener condemn 'd . 
 bagot . if judgment lie in them , then so do we , 
 becaus we ever have been near the king . 
 green . well , i will for refug straight to bristow castl . 
 the earl of wiltshir is alreadi there . 
 bushi . thither will i with you ; for littl offic 
 will the hate common perform for us , 
 except eke cur to tear us all to piec . 
 will you go along with us ? 
 bagot . no ; i will to ireland to hi majesti . 
 farewel . if heart 's presag be not vain , 
 we three here part that ne'er shall meet again . 
 bushi . that 's as york thrive to beat back bolingbrok . 
 green . ala , poor duke ! the task he undertak 
 is numb'r sand and drink ocean dri . 
 where one on hi side fight , thousand will fli . 
 farewel at once-for onc , for all , and ever . 
 bushi . well , we may meet again . 
 bagot . i fear me , never . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 gloucestershir 
 
 enter bolingbrok and northumberland , forc 
 
 bolingbrok . how far is it , my lord , to berkeley now ? 
 northumberland . believ me , nobl lord , 
 i am a stranger here in gloucestershir . 
 these high wild hill and rough uneven way 
 draw out our mile , and make them wearisom ; 
 and yet your fair discours hath been as sugar , 
 make the hard way sweet and delect . 
 but i bethink me what a weari way 
 from ravenspurgh to cotswold will be found 
 in ross and willoughbi , want your compani , 
 which , i protest , hath veri much beguil 'd 
 the tedious and process of my travel . 
 but their is sweet'n with the hope to have 
 the present benefit which i possess ; 
 and hope to joy is littl less in joy 
 than hope enjoy 'd . by thi the weari lord 
 shall make their way seem short , as mine hath done 
 by sight of what i have , your nobl compani . 
 bolingbrok . of much less valu is my compani 
 than your good word . but who come here ? 
 
 enter harri perci 
 
 northumberland . it is my son , young harri perci , 
 sent from my brother worcest , whencesoev . 
 harri , how fare your uncl ? 
 perci . i had thought , my lord , to have learn 'd hi health of you . 
 northumberland . whi , is he not with the queen ? 
 perci . no , my good lord ; he hath forsook the court , 
 broken hi staff of offic , and disper 'd 
 the household of the king . 
 northumberland . what wa hi reason ? 
 he wa not so resolv 'd when last we spake togeth . 
 perci . becaus your lordship wa proclaim traitor . 
 but he , my lord , is gone to ravenspurgh , 
 to offer servic to the duke of hereford ; 
 and sent me over by berkeley , to discov 
 what power the duke of york had levi there ; 
 then with direct to repair to ravenspurgh . 
 northumberland . have you forgot the duke of hereford , boy ? 
 perci . no , my good lord ; for that is not forgot 
 which ne'er i did rememb ; to my knowledg , 
 i never in my life did look on him . 
 northumberland . then learn to know him now ; thi is the duke . 
 perci . my graciou lord , i tender you my servic , 
 such as it is , be tender , raw , and young ; 
 which elder day shall ripen , and confirm 
 to more approv servic and desert . 
 bolingbrok . i thank thee , gentl perci ; and be sure 
 i count myself in noth els so happi 
 as in a soul rememb'r my good friend ; 
 and as my fortun ripen with thi love , 
 it shall be still thi true love 's recompens . 
 my heart thi coven make , my hand thu seal it . 
 northumberland . how far is it to berkeley ? and what stir 
 keep good old york there with hi men of war ? 
 perci . there stand the castl , by yon tuft of tree , 
 mann 'd with three hundr men , as i have heard ; 
 and in it are the lord of york , berkeley , and seymour- 
 none els of name and nobl estim . 
 
 enter ross and willoughbi 
 
 northumberland . here come the lord of ross and willoughbi , 
 bloodi with spur , fiery-r with hast . 
 bolingbrok . welcom , my lord . i wot your love pursu 
 a banish 'd traitor . all my treasuri 
 is yet but unfelt thank , which , more enrich 'd , 
 shall be your love and labour 's recompens . 
 ross . your presenc make us rich , most nobl lord . 
 willoughbi . and far surmount our labour to attain it . 
 bolingbrok . evermor thank , the exchequ of the poor ; 
 which , till my infant fortun come to year , 
 stand for my bounti . but who come here ? 
 
 enter berkeley 
 
 northumberland . it is my lord of berkeley , as i guess . 
 berkeley . my lord of hereford , my messag is to you . 
 bolingbrok . my lord , my answer is-'to lancast ' ; 
 and i am come to seek that name in england ; 
 and i must find that titl in your tongu 
 befor i make repli to aught you say . 
 berkeley . mistak me not , my lord ; 't is not my mean 
 to raze one titl of your honour out . 
 to you , my lord , i come-what lord you will- 
 from the most graciou regent of thi land , 
 the duke of york , to know what prick you on 
 to take advantag of the absent time , 
 and fright our nativ peac with self-born arm . 
 
 enter york , attend 
 
 bolingbrok . i shall not need transport my word by you ; 
 here come hi grace in person . my nobl uncl ! 
 [ kneel ] 
 york . show me thi humbl heart , and not thi knee , 
 whose duti is deceiv and fals . 
 bolingbrok . my graciou uncl ! - 
 york . tut , tut ! 
 grace me no grace , nor uncl me no uncl . 
 i am no traitor 's uncl ; and that word 'grace ' 
 in an ungraci mouth is but profan . 
 whi have those banish 'd and forbidden leg 
 dar 'd onc to touch a dust of england 's ground ? 
 but then more 'whi ? '-whi have they dar 'd to march 
 so mani mile upon her peac bosom , 
 fright her pale-fac 'd villag with war 
 and ostent of despis arm ? 
 com'st thou becaus the anoint king is henc ? 
 whi , foolish boy , the king is left behind , 
 and in my loyal bosom lie hi power . 
 were i but now lord of such hot youth 
 as when brave gaunt , thi father , and myself 
 rescu the black princ , that young mar of men , 
 from forth the rank of mani thousand french , 
 o , then how quickli should thi arm of mine , 
 now prison to the palsi , chastis the 
 and minist correct to thi fault ! 
 bolingbrok my graciou uncl , let me know my fault ; 
 on what condit stand it and wherein ? 
 york . even in condit of the worst degree- 
 in gross rebellion and detest treason . 
 thou art a banish 'd man , and here art come 
 befor the expir of thi time , 
 in brave arm against thi sovereign . 
 bolingbrok . as i wa banish 'd , i wa banish 'd hereford ; 
 but as i come , i come for lancast . 
 and , nobl uncl , i beseech your grace 
 look on my wrong with an indiffer eye . 
 you are my father , for methink in you 
 i see old gaunt aliv . o , then , my father , 
 will you permit that i shall stand condemn 'd 
 a wander vagabond ; my right and royalti 
 pluck 'd from my arm perforc , and given away 
 to upstart unthrift ? wherefor wa i born ? 
 if that my cousin king be king in england , 
 it must be grant i am duke of lancast . 
 you have a son , aumerl , my nobl cousin ; 
 had you first die , and he been thu trod down , 
 he should have found hi uncl gaunt a father 
 to rous hi wrong and chase them to the bay . 
 i am deni to sue my liveri here , 
 and yet my letter patent give me leav . 
 my father 's good are all distrain 'd and sold ; 
 and these and all are all amiss employ 'd . 
 what would you have me do ? i am a subject , 
 and i challeng law-attorney are deni me ; 
 and therefor person i lay my claim 
 to my inherit of free descent . 
 northumberland . the nobl duke hath been too much abus . 
 ross . it stand your grace upon to do him right . 
 willoughbi . base men by hi endow are made great . 
 york . my lord of england , let me tell you thi : 
 i have had feel of my cousin 's wrong , 
 and labour 'd all i could to do him right ; 
 but in thi kind to come , in brave arm , 
 be hi own carver and cut out hi way , 
 to find out right with wrong-it may not be ; 
 and you that do abet him in thi kind 
 cherish rebellion , and are rebel all . 
 northumberland . the nobl duke hath sworn hi come is 
 but for hi own ; and for the right of that 
 we all have strongli sworn to give him aid ; 
 and let him never see joy that break that oath ! 
 york . well , well , i see the issu of these arm . 
 i can not mend it , i must need confess , 
 becaus my power is weak and all ill left ; 
 but if i could , by him that gave me life , 
 i would attach you all and make you stoop 
 unto the sovereign merci of the king ; 
 but sinc i can not , be it known unto you 
 i do remain as neuter . so , fare you well ; 
 unless you pleas to enter in the castl , 
 and there repos you for thi night . 
 bolingbrok . an offer , uncl , that we will accept . 
 but we must win your grace to go with us 
 to bristow castl , which they say is held 
 by bushi , bagot , and their complic , 
 the caterpillar of the commonwealth , 
 which i have sworn to weed and pluck away . 
 york . it may be i will go with you ; but yet i 'll paus , 
 for i am loath to break our countri 's law . 
 nor friend nor foe , to me welcom you are . 
 thing past redress are now with me past care . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 a camp in wale 
 
 enter earl of salisburi and a welsh captain 
 
 captain . my lord of salisburi , we have stay 'd ten day 
 and hardli kept our countrymen togeth , 
 and yet we hear no tide from the king ; 
 therefor we will dispers ourselv . farewel . 
 salisburi . stay yet anoth day , thou trusti welshman ; 
 the king reposeth all hi confid in thee . 
 captain . 't is thought the king is dead ; we will not stay . 
 the bay tree in our countri are all wither 'd , 
 and meteor fright the fix star of heaven ; 
 the pale-fac 'd moon look bloodi on the earth , 
 and lean-look 'd prophet whisper fear chang ; 
 rich men look sad , and ruffian danc and leap- 
 the one in fear to lose what they enjoy , 
 the other to enjoy by rage and war . 
 these sign forerun the death or fall of king . 
 farewel . our countrymen are gone and fled , 
 as well assur 'd richard their king is dead . exit 
 salisburi . ah , richard , with the eye of heavi mind , 
 i see thi glori like a shoot star 
 fall to the base earth from the firmament ! 
 the sun set weep in the lowli west , 
 wit storm to come , woe , and unrest ; 
 thi friend are fled , to wait upon thi foe ; 
 and crossli to thi good all fortun goe . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 bolingbrok 's camp at bristol 
 
 enter bolingbrok , york , northumberland , perci , ross , willoughbi , 
 bushi and green , prison 
 
 bolingbrok . bring forth these men . 
 bushi and green , i will not vex your souls- 
 sinc present your soul must part your bodies- 
 with too much urg your pernici live , 
 for 'twere no chariti ; yet , to wash your blood 
 from off my hand , here in the view of men 
 i will unfold some caus of your death : 
 you have misl a princ , a royal king , 
 a happi gentleman in blood and lineament , 
 by you unhappi and disfigur clean ; 
 you have in manner with your sin hour 
 made a divorc betwixt hi queen and him ; 
 broke the possess of a royal bed , 
 and stain 'd the beauti of a fair queen 's cheek 
 with tear drawn from her eye by your foul wrong ; 
 myself-a princ by fortun of my birth , 
 near to the king in blood , and near in love 
 till you did make him misinterpret me- 
 have stoop 'd my neck under your injuri 
 and sigh 'd my english breath in foreign cloud , 
 eat the bitter bread of banish , 
 whilst you have fed upon my signori , 
 dispark 'd my park and fell 'd my forest wood , 
 from my own window torn my household coat , 
 raz 'd out my impres , leav me no sign 
 save men 's opinion and my live blood 
 to show the world i am a gentleman . 
 thi and much more , much more than twice all thi , 
 condemn you to the death . see them deliv over 
 to execut and the hand of death . 
 bushi . more welcom is the stroke of death to me 
 than bolingbrok to england . lord , farewel . 
 green . my comfort is that heaven will take our soul , 
 and plagu injustic with the pain of hell . 
 bolingbrok . my lord northumberland , see them dispatch 'd . 
 exeunt northumberland , and other , with the prison 
 uncl , you say the queen is at your hous ; 
 for god 's sake , fairli let her be entreat . 
 tell her i send to her my kind commend ; 
 take special care my greet be deliv . 
 york . a gentleman of mine i have dispatch 'd 
 with letter of your love to her at larg . 
 bolingbrok . thank , gentl uncl . come , lord , away , 
 to fight with glendow and hi complic . 
 awhil to work , and after holiday . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 the coast of wale . a castl in view 
 
 drum . flourish and colour . enter the king , the bishop of carlisl , 
 aumerl , and soldier 
 
 king richard . barkloughli castl can they thi at hand ? 
 aumerl . yea , my lord . how brook your grace the air 
 after your late toss on the break sea ? 
 king richard . need must i like it well . i weep for joy 
 to stand upon my kingdom onc again . 
 dear earth , i do salut thee with my hand , 
 though rebel wound thee with their hors ' hoof . 
 as a long-part mother with her child 
 play fondli with her tear and smile in meet , 
 so weeping-smil greet i thee , my earth , 
 and do thee favour with my royal hand . 
 feed not thi sovereign 's foe , my gentl earth , 
 nor with thi sweet comfort hi raven sens ; 
 but let thi spider , that suck up thi venom , 
 and heavy-gait toad , lie in their way , 
 do annoy to the treacher feet 
 which with usurp step do trampl thee ; 
 yield sting nettl to mine enemi ; 
 and when they from thi bosom pluck a flower , 
 guard it , i pray thee , with a lurk adder , 
 whose doubl tongu may with a mortal touch 
 throw death upon thi sovereign 's enemi . 
 mock not my senseless conjur , lord . 
 thi earth shall have a feel , and these stone 
 prove arm soldier , ere her nativ king 
 shall falter under foul rebellion 's arm . 
 carlisl . fear not , my lord ; that power that made you king 
 hath power to keep you king in spite of all . 
 the mean that heaven yield must be embrac 'd 
 and not neglect ; els , if heaven would , 
 and we will not , heaven 's offer we refus , 
 the proffer mean of succour and redress . 
 aumerl . he mean , my lord , that we are too remiss ; 
 whilst bolingbrok , through our secur , 
 grow strong and great in substanc and in power . 
 king richard . discomfort cousin ! know'st thou not 
 that when the search eye of heaven is hid , 
 behind the globe , that light the lower world , 
 then thiev and robber rang abroad unseen 
 in murder and in outrag boldli here ; 
 but when from under thi terrestri ball 
 he fire the proud top of the eastern pine 
 and dart hi light through everi guilti hole , 
 then murder , treason , and detest sin , 
 the cloak of night be pluck 'd from off their back , 
 stand bare and nake , trembl at themselv ? 
 so when thi thief , thi traitor , bolingbrok , 
 who all thi while hath revel 'd in the night , 
 whilst we were wand'r with the antipod , 
 shall see us rise in our throne , the east , 
 hi treason will sit blush in hi face , 
 not abl to endur the sight of day , 
 but self-affright trembl at hi sin . 
 not all the water in the rough rude sea 
 can wash the balm off from an anoint king ; 
 the breath of worldli men can not depos 
 the deputi elect by the lord . 
 for everi man that bolingbrok hath press 'd 
 to lift shrewd steel against our golden crown , 
 god for hi richard hath in heavenli pay 
 a gloriou angel . then , if angel fight , 
 weak men must fall ; for heaven still guard the right . 
 
 enter salisburi 
 
 welcom , my lord . how far off lie your power ? 
 salisburi . nor near nor farther off , my graciou lord , 
 than thi weak arm . discomfort guid my tongu , 
 and bid me speak of noth but despair . 
 one day too late , i fear me , nobl lord , 
 hath cloud all thi happi day on earth . 
 o , call back yesterday , bid time return , 
 and thou shalt have twelv thousand fight men ! 
 to-day , to-day , unhappi day , too late , 
 o'erthrow thi joy , friend , fortun , and thi state ; 
 for all the welshmen , hear thou wert dead , 
 are gone to bolingbrok , disper 'd , and fled . 
 aumerl . comfort , my lieg , whi look your grace so pale ? 
 king richard . but now the blood of twenti thousand men 
 did triumph in my face , and they are fled ; 
 and , till so much blood thither come again , 
 have i not reason to look pale and dead ? 
 all soul that will be safe , fli from my side ; 
 for time hath set a blot upon my pride . 
 aumerl . comfort , my lieg ; rememb who you are . 
 king richard . i had forgot myself ; am i not king ? 
 awak , thou coward majesti ! thou sleepest . 
 is not the king 's name twenti thousand name ? 
 arm , arm , my name ! a puni subject strike 
 at thi great glori . look not to the ground , 
 ye favourit of a king ; are we not high ? 
 high be our thought . i know my uncl york 
 hath power enough to serv our turn . but who come here ? 
 
 enter scroop 
 
 scroop . more health and happi betid my lieg 
 than can my care-tun 'd tongu deliv him . 
 king richard . mine ear is open and my heart prepar 'd . 
 the worst is worldli loss thou canst unfold . 
 say , is my kingdom lost ? whi , 't wa my care , 
 and what loss is it to be rid of care ? 
 strive bolingbrok to be as great as we ? 
 greater he shall not be ; if he serv god , 
 we 'll serv him too , and be hi fellow so . 
 revolt our subject ? that we can not mend ; 
 they break their faith to god as well as us . 
 cri woe , destruct , ruin , and decay- 
 the worst is death , and death will have hi day . 
 scroop . glad am i that your high is so arm 'd 
 to bear the tide of calam . 
 like an unseason stormi day 
 which make the silver river drown their shore , 
 as if the world were all dissolv 'd to tear , 
 so high abov hi limit swell the rage 
 of bolingbrok , cover your fear land 
 with hard bright steel and heart harder than steel . 
 white-beard have arm 'd their thin and hairless scalp 
 against thi majesti ; boy , with women 's voic , 
 strive to speak big , and clap their femal joint 
 in stiff unwieldi arm against thi crown ; 
 thi veri beadsmen learn to bend their bow 
 of double-fat yew against thi state ; 
 yea , distaff-women manag rusti bill 
 against thi seat : both young and old rebel , 
 and all goe wors than i have power to tell . 
 king richard . too well , too well thou tell'st a tale so in . 
 where is the earl of wiltshir ? where is bagot ? 
 what is becom of bushi ? where is green ? 
 that they have let the danger enemi 
 measur our confin with such peac step ? 
 if we prevail , their head shall pay for it . 
 i warrant they have made peac with bolingbrok . 
 scroop . peac have they made with him inde , my lord . 
 king richard . o villain , viper , damn 'd without redempt ! 
 dog , easili won to fawn on ani man ! 
 snake , in my heart-blood warm 'd , that sting my heart ! 
 three judas , each one thrice wors than juda ! 
 would they make peac ? terribl hell make war 
 upon their spot soul for thi offenc ! 
 scroop . sweet love , i see , chang hi properti , 
 turn to the sourest and most deadli hate . 
 again uncurs their soul ; their peac is made 
 with head , and not with hand ; those whom you curs 
 have felt the worst of death 's destroy wound 
 and lie full low , grav 'd in the hollow ground . 
 aumerl . is bushi , green , and the earl of wiltshir dead ? 
 scroop . ay , all of them at bristow lost their head . 
 aumerl . where is the duke my father with hi power ? 
 king richard . no matter where-of comfort no man speak . 
 let 's talk of grave , of worm , and epitaph ; 
 make dust our paper , and with raini eye 
 write sorrow on the bosom of the earth . 
 let 's choos executor and talk of will ; 
 and yet not so-for what can we bequeath 
 save our depos bodi to the ground ? 
 our land , our live , and an , are bolingbrok 's . 
 and noth can we can our own but death 
 and that small model of the barren earth 
 which serv as past and cover to our bone . 
 for god 's sake let us sit upon the ground 
 and tell sad stori of the death of king : 
 how some have been depo 'd , some slain in war , 
 some haunt by the ghost they have depo 'd , 
 some poison 'd by their wive , some sleep kill 'd , 
 all murder'd-for within the hollow crown 
 that round the mortal templ of a king 
 keep death hi court ; and there the antic sit , 
 scof hi state and grin at hi pomp ; 
 allow him a breath , a littl scene , 
 to monarch , be fear 'd , and kill with look ; 
 infus him with self and vain conceit , 
 as if thi flesh which wall about our life 
 were brass impregn ; and , humour 'd thu , 
 come at the last , and with a littl pin 
 bore through hi castl wall , and farewel , king ! 
 cover your head , and mock not flesh and blood 
 with solemn rever ; throw away respect , 
 tradit , form , and ceremoni duti ; 
 for you have but mistook me all thi while . 
 i live with bread like you , feel want , 
 tast grief , need friend : subject thu , 
 how can you say to me i am a king ? 
 carlisl . my lord , wise men ne'er sit and wail their woe , 
 but present prevent the way to wail . 
 to fear the foe , sinc fear oppresseth strength , 
 give , in your weak , strength unto your foe , 
 and so your folli fight against yourself . 
 fear and be slain-no wors can come to fight ; 
 and fight and die is death destroy death , 
 where fear die pay death servil breath . 
 aumerl . my father hath a power ; inquir of him , 
 and learn to make a bodi of a limb . 
 king richard . thou chid'st me well . proud bolingbrok , i come 
 to chang blow with thee for our day of doom . 
 thi agu fit of fear is over-blown ; 
 an easi task it is to win our own . 
 say , scroop , where lie our uncl with hi power ? 
 speak sweetli , man , although thi look be sour . 
 scroop . men judg by the complexion of the sky 
 the state in inclin of the day ; 
 so may you by my dull and heavi eye , 
 my tongu hath but a heavier tale to say . 
 i play the tortur , by small and small 
 to lengthen out the worst that must be spoken : 
 your uncl york is join 'd with bolingbrok ; 
 and all your northern castl yield up , 
 and all your southern gentlemen in arm 
 upon hi parti . 
 king richard . thou hast said enough . 
 [ to aumerl ] beshrew thee , cousin , which didst lead me forth 
 of that sweet way i wa in to despair ! 
 what say you now ? what comfort have we now ? 
 by heaven , i 'll hate him everlastingli 
 that bid me be of comfort ani more . 
 go to flint castl ; there i 'll pine away ; 
 a king , woe 's slave , shall kingli woe obey . 
 that power i have , discharg ; and let them go 
 to ear the land that hath some hope to grow , 
 for i have none . let no man speak again 
 to alter thi , for counsel is but vain . 
 aumerl . my lieg , one word . 
 king richard . he doe me doubl wrong 
 that wound me with the flatteri of hi tongu . 
 discharg my follow ; let them henc away , 
 from richard 's night to bolingbrok 's fair day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 wale . befor flint castl 
 
 enter , with drum and colour , bolingbrok , york , northumberland , 
 and forc 
 
 bolingbrok . so that by thi intellig we learn 
 the welshmen are disper 'd ; and salisburi 
 is gone to meet the king , who late land 
 with some few privat friend upon thi coast . 
 northumberland . the news is veri fair and good , my lord . 
 richard not far from henc hath hid hi head . 
 york . it would beseem the lord northumberland 
 to say 'king richard . ' alack the heavi day 
 when such a sacr king should hide hi head ! 
 northumberland . your grace mistak ; onli to be brief , 
 left i hi titl out . 
 york . the time hath been , 
 would you have been so brief with him , he would 
 have been so brief with you to shorten you , 
 for take so the head , your whole head 's length . 
 bolingbrok . mistak not , uncl , further than you should . 
 york . take not , good cousin , further than you should , 
 lest you mistak . the heaven are over our head . 
 bolingbrok . i know it , uncl ; and oppos not myself 
 against their will . but who come here ? 
 
 enter perci 
 
 welcom , harri . what , will not thi castl yield ? 
 pierci . the castl royal is mann 'd , my lord , 
 against thi entranc . 
 bolingbrok . royal ! 
 whi , it contain no king ? 
 perci . ye , my good lord , 
 it doth contain a king ; king richard lie 
 within the limit of yon lime and stone ; 
 and with him are the lord aumerl , lord salisburi , 
 sir stephen scroop , besid a clergyman 
 of holi rever ; who , i can not learn . 
 northumberland . o , belik it is the bishop of carlisl . 
 bolingbrok . [ to northumberland ] nobl lord , 
 go to the rude rib of that ancient castl ; 
 through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley 
 into hi ruin 'd ear , and thu deliv : 
 henri bolingbrok 
 on both hi knee doth kiss king richard 's hand , 
 and send allegi and true faith of heart 
 to hi most royal person ; hither come 
 even at hi feet to lay my arm and power , 
 provid that my banish repeal 'd 
 and land restor 'd again be freeli grant ; 
 if not , i 'll use the advantag of my power 
 and lay the summer 's dust with shower of blood 
 rain 'd from the wound of slaughter englishmen ; 
 the which how far off from the mind of bolingbrok 
 it is such crimson tempest should bedrench 
 the fresh green lap of fair king richard 's land , 
 my stoop duti tenderli shall show . 
 go , signifi as much , while here we march 
 upon the grassi carpet of thi plain . 
 [ northumberland advanc to the castl , with a trumpet ] 
 let 's march without the nois of threat'n drum , 
 that from thi castl 's totter battlement 
 our fair appoint may be well peru 'd . 
 methink king richard and myself should meet 
 with no less terror than the element 
 of fire and water , when their thund'r shock 
 at meet tear the cloudi cheek of heaven . 
 be he the fire , i 'll be the yield water ; 
 the rage be hi , whilst on the earth i rain 
 my waters-on the earth , and not on him . 
 march on , and mark king richard how he look . 
 
 parl without , and answer within ; then a flourish . 
 enter on the wall , the king , the bishop of carlisl , 
 aumerl , scroop , and salisburi 
 
 see , see , king richard doth himself appear , 
 as doth the blush discont sun 
 from out the fieri portal of the east , 
 when he perceiv the enviou cloud are bent 
 to dim hi glori and to stain the track 
 of hi bright passag to the occid . 
 york . yet he look like a king . behold , hi eye , 
 as bright as is the eagl 's , lighten forth 
 control majesti . alack , alack , for woe , 
 that ani harm should stain so fair a show ! 
 king richard . [ to northumberland ] we are amaz 'd ; and thu long 
 have we stood 
 to watch the fear bend of thi knee , 
 becaus we thought ourself thi law king ; 
 and if we be , how dare thi joint forget 
 to pay their aw duti to our presenc ? 
 if we be not , show us the hand of god 
 that hath dismiss 'd us from our stewardship ; 
 for well we know no hand of blood and bone 
 can gripe the sacr handl of our sceptr , 
 unless he do profan , steal , or usurp . 
 and though you think that all , as you have done , 
 have torn their soul by turn them from us , 
 and we are barren and bereft of friend , 
 yet know-mi master , god omnipot , 
 is muster in hi cloud on our behalf 
 armi of pestil ; and they shall strike 
 your children yet unborn and unbegot , 
 that lift your vassal hand against my head 
 and threat the glori of my preciou crown . 
 tell bolingbrok , for yon methink he stand , 
 that everi stride he make upon my land 
 is danger treason ; he is come to open 
 the purpl testament of bleed war ; 
 but ere the crown he look for live in peac , 
 ten thousand bloodi crown of mother ' son 
 shall ill becom the flower of england 's face , 
 chang the complexion of her maid-pal peac 
 to scarlet indign , and bedew 
 her pastur ' grass with faith english blood . 
 northumberland . the king of heaven forbid our lord the king 
 should so with civil and uncivil arm 
 be rush 'd upon ! thi thrice nobl cousin , 
 harri bolingbrok , doth humbl kiss thi hand ; 
 and by the honour tomb he swear 
 that stand upon your royal grandsir 's bone , 
 and by the royalti of both your blood , 
 current that spring from one most graciou head , 
 and by the buri hand of warlik gaunt , 
 and by the worth and honour of himself , 
 compris all that may be sworn or said , 
 hi come hither hath no further scope 
 than for hi lineal royalti , and to beg 
 enfranchis immedi on hi knee ; 
 which on thi royal parti grant onc , 
 hi glitter arm he will commend to rust , 
 hi barb steed to stabl , and hi heart 
 to faith servic of your majesti . 
 thi swear he , as he is a princ , is just ; 
 and as i am a gentleman i credit him . 
 king richard . northumberland , say thu the king return : 
 hi nobl cousin is right welcom hither ; 
 and all the number of hi fair demand 
 shall be accomplish 'd without contradict . 
 with all the graciou utter thou hast 
 speak to hi gentl hear kind commend . 
 [ to aumerl ] we do debas ourselv , cousin , do we not , 
 to look so poorli and to speak so fair ? 
 shall we call back northumberland , and send 
 defianc to the traitor , and so die ? 
 aumerl . no , good my lord ; let 's fight with gentl word 
 till time lend friend , and friend their help sword . 
 king richard . o god , o god ! that e'er thi tongu of mine 
 that laid the sentenc of dread banish 
 on yon proud man should take it off again 
 with word of sooth ! o that i were as great 
 as is my grief , or lesser than my name ! 
 or that i could forget what i have been ! 
 or not rememb what i must be now ! 
 swell'st thou , proud heart ? i 'll give thee scope to beat , 
 sinc foe have scope to beat both thee and me . 
 aumerl . northumberland come back from bolingbrok . 
 king richard . what must the king do now ? must he submit ? 
 the king shall do it . must he be depo 'd ? 
 the king shall be content . must he lose 
 the name of king ? a god 's name , let it go . 
 i 'll give my jewel for a set of bead , 
 my gorgeou palac for a hermitag , 
 my gay apparel for an almsman 's gown , 
 my figur 'd goblet for a dish of wood , 
 my sceptr for a palmer 's walk staff , 
 my subject for a pair of carv saint , 
 and my larg kingdom for a littl grave , 
 a littl littl grave , an obscur grave- 
 or i 'll be buri in the king 's high way , 
 some way of common trade , where subject ' feet 
 may hourli trampl on their sovereign 's head ; 
 for on my heart they tread now whilst i live , 
 and buri onc , whi not upon my head ? 
 aumerl , thou weep'st , my tender-heart cousin ! 
 we 'll make foul weather with despis tear ; 
 our sigh and they shall lodg the summer corn 
 and make a dearth in thi revolt land . 
 or shall we play the wanton with our woe 
 and make some pretti match with shed tear ? 
 as thu : to drop them still upon one place 
 till they have fret us a pair of grave 
 within the earth ; and , therein laid-ther lie 
 two kinsmen digg 'd their grave with weep eye . 
 would not thi ill do well ? well , well , i see 
 i talk but idli , and you laugh at me . 
 most mighti princ , my lord northumberland , 
 what say king bolingbrok ? will hi majesti 
 give richard leav to live till richard die ? 
 you make a leg , and bolingbrok say ay . 
 northumberland . my lord , in the base court he doth attend 
 to speak with you ; may it pleas you to come down ? 
 king richard . down , down i come , like glist'r phaethon , 
 want the manag of unruli jade . 
 in the base court ? base court , where king grow base , 
 to come at traitor ' call , and do them grace . 
 in the base court ? come down ? down , court ! down , king ! 
 for night-owl shriek where mount lark should sing . 
 exeunt from abov 
 bolingbrok . what say hi majesti ? 
 northumberland . sorrow and grief of heart 
 make him speak fondli , like a frantic man ; 
 yet he is come . 
 
 enter the king , and hi attend , below 
 
 bolingbrok . stand all apart , 
 and show fair duti to hi majesti . [ he kneel down ] 
 my graciou lord- 
 king richard . fair cousin , you debas your princ knee 
 to make the base earth proud with kiss it . 
 me rather had my heart might feel your love 
 than my unplea 'd eye see your courtesi . 
 up , cousin , up ; your heart is up , i know , 
 [ touch hi own head ] thu high at least , although your 
 knee be low . 
 bolingbrok . my graciou lord , i come but for mine own . 
 king richard . your own is your , and i am your , and all . 
 bolingbrok . so far be mine , my most redoubt lord , 
 as my true servic shall deserv your love . 
 king richard . well you deserv . they well deserv to have 
 that know the strong'st and surest way to get . 
 uncl , give me your hand ; nay , dri your eye : 
 tear show their love , but want their remedi . 
 cousin , i am too young to be your father , 
 though you are old enough to be my heir . 
 what you will have , i 'll give , and will too ; 
 for do we must what forc will have us do . 
 set on toward london . cousin , is it so ? 
 bolingbrok . yea , my good lord . 
 king richard . then i must not say no . flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 the duke of york 's garden 
 
 enter the queen and two ladi 
 
 queen . what sport shall we devis here in thi garden 
 to drive away the heavi thought of care ? 
 ladi . madam , we 'll play at bowl . 
 queen . 'twill make me think the world is full of rub 
 and that my fortun run against the bia . 
 ladi . madam , we 'll danc . 
 queen . my leg can keep no measur in delight , 
 when my poor heart no measur keep in grief ; 
 therefor no danc , girl ; some other sport . 
 ladi . madam , we 'll tell tale . 
 queen . of sorrow or of joy ? 
 ladi . of either , madam . 
 queen . of neither , girl ; 
 for if of joy , be altogeth want , 
 it doth rememb me the more of sorrow ; 
 or if of grief , be altogeth had , 
 it add more sorrow to my want of joy ; 
 for what i have i need not to repeat , 
 and what i want it boot not to complain . 
 ladi . madam , i 'll sing . 
 queen . 't is well ' that thou hast caus ; 
 but thou shouldst pleas me better wouldst thou weep . 
 ladi . i could weep , madam , would it do you good . 
 queen . and i could sing , would weep do me good , 
 and never borrow ani tear of thee . 
 
 enter a garden and two servant 
 
 but stay , here come the garden . 
 let 's step into the shadow of these tree . 
 my wretched unto a row of pin , 
 they will talk of state , for everi one doth so 
 against a chang : woe is forerun with woe . 
 [ queen and ladi retir ] 
 garden . go , bind thou up yon dangl apricock , 
 which , like unruli children , make their sire 
 stoop with oppress of their prodig weight ; 
 give some support to the bend twig . 
 go thou , and eke an execution 
 cut off the head of too fast grow spray 
 that look too lofti in our commonwealth : 
 all must be even in our govern . 
 you thu employ 'd , i will go root away 
 the noisom weed which without profit suck 
 the soil 's fertil from wholesom flower . 
 servant . whi should we , in the compass of a pale , 
 keep law and form and due proport , 
 show , as in a model , our firm estat , 
 when our sea-wal garden , the whole land , 
 is full of weed ; her fairest flower chok 'd up , 
 her fruit tree all unprun 'd , her hedg ruin 'd , 
 her knot disord , and her wholesom herb 
 swarm with caterpillar ? 
 garden . hold thi peac . 
 he that hath suffer 'd thi disord 'd spring 
 hath now himself met with the fall of leaf ; 
 the weed which hi broad-spread leav did shelter , 
 that seem 'd in eat him to hold him up , 
 are pluck 'd up root and all by bolingbroke- 
 i mean the earl of wiltshir , bushi , green . 
 servant . what , are they dead ? 
 garden . they are ; and bolingbrok 
 hath seiz 'd the wast king . o , what piti is it 
 that he had not so trimm 'd and dress 'd hi land 
 as we thi garden ! we at time of year 
 do wound the bark , the skin of our fruit tree , 
 lest , be over-proud in sap and blood , 
 with too much rich it confound itself ; 
 had he done so to great and grow men , 
 they might have ev 'd to bear , and he to tast 
 their fruit of duti . superflu branch 
 we lop away , that bear bough may live ; 
 had he done so , himself had home the crown , 
 which wast of idl hour hath quit thrown down . 
 servant . what , think you the king shall be depos ? 
 garden . depress 'd he is alreadi , and depo 'd 
 't is doubt he will be . letter came last night 
 to a dear friend of the good duke of york 's 
 that tell black tide . 
 queen . o , i am press 'd to death through want of speak ! 
 [ come forward ] 
 thou , old adam 's like , set to dress thi garden , 
 how dare thi harsh rude tongu sound thi unpleas news ? 
 what eve , what serpent , hath suggest the 
 to make a second fall of curs man ? 
 whi dost thou say king richard is depo 'd ? 
 dar'st thou , thou littl better thing than earth , 
 divin hi downfal ? say , where , when , and how , 
 cam'st thou by thi ill tide ? speak , thou wretch . 
 garden . pardon me , madam ; littl joy have 
 to breath thi news ; yet what i say is true . 
 king richard , he is in the mighti hold 
 of bolingbrok . their fortun both are weigh 'd . 
 in your lord 's scale is noth but himself , 
 and some few vaniti that make him light ; 
 but in the balanc of great bolingbrok , 
 besid himself , are all the english peer , 
 and with that odd he weigh king richard down . 
 post you to london , and you will find it so ; 
 i speak no more than everi one doth know . 
 queen . nimbl mischanc , that art so light of foot , 
 doth not thi embassag belong to me , 
 and am i last that know it ? o , thou thinkest 
 to serv me last , that i may longest keep 
 thi sorrow in my breast . come , ladi , go 
 to meet at london london 's king in woe . 
 what , wa i born to thi , that my sad look 
 should grace the triumph of great bolingbrok ? 
 gard'ner , for tell me these news of woe , 
 pray god the plant thou graft'st may never grow ! 
 exeunt queen and ladi 
 garden . poor queen , so that thi state might be no wors , 
 i would my skill were subject to thi curs . 
 here did she fall a tear ; here in thi place 
 i 'll set a bank of rue , sour herb of grace . 
 rue , even for ruth , here shortli shall be seen , 
 in the remembr of a weep queen . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 westminst hall 
 
 enter , as to the parliament , bolingbrok , aumerl , northumberland , perci , 
 fitzwat , surrey , the bishop of carlisl , the abbot of westminst , 
 and other ; herald , offic , and bagot 
 
 bolingbrok . call forth bagot . 
 now , bagot , freeli speak thi mind- 
 what thou dost know of nobl gloucest 's death ; 
 who wrought it with the king , and who perform 'd 
 the bloodi offic of hi timeless end . 
 bagot . then set befor my face the lord aumerl . 
 bolingbrok . cousin , stand forth , and look upon that man . 
 bagot . my lord aumerl , i know your dare tongu 
 scorn to unsay what onc it hath deliv 'd . 
 in that dead time when gloucest 's death wa plot 
 i heard you say 'i not my arm of length , 
 that reacheth from the rest english court 
 as far as calai , to mine uncl 's head ? ' 
 amongst much other talk that veri time 
 i heard you say that you had rather refus 
 the offer of an hundr thousand crown 
 than bolingbrok 's return to england ; 
 ad withal , how blest thi land would be 
 in thi your cousin 's death . 
 aumerl . princ , and nobl lord , 
 what answer shall i make to thi base man ? 
 shall i so much dishonour my fair star 
 on equal term to give him chastis ? 
 either i must , or have mine honour soil 'd 
 with the attaind of hi slander lip . 
 there is my gage , the manual seal of death 
 that mark thee out for hell . i say thou liest , 
 and will maintain what thou hast said is fals 
 in thi heart-blood , through be all too base 
 to stain the temper of my knightli sword . 
 bolingbrok . bagot , forbear ; thou shalt not take it up . 
 aumerl . except one , i would he were the best 
 in all thi presenc that hath mov 'd me so . 
 fitzwat . if that thi valour stand on sympathi , 
 there is my gage , aumerl , in gage to thine . 
 by that fair sun which show me where thou stand'st , 
 i heard thee say , and vauntingli thou spak'st it , 
 that thou wert caus of nobl gloucest 's death . 
 if thou deniest it twenti time , thou liest ; 
 and i will turn thi falsehood to thi heart , 
 where it wa forg , with my rapier 's point . 
 aumerl . thou dar'st not , coward , live to see that day . 
 fitzwat . now , by my soul , i would it were thi hour . 
 aumerl . fitzwat , thou art damn 'd to hell for thi . 
 perci . aumerl , thou liest ; hi honour is as true 
 in thi appeal as thou art an unjust ; 
 and that thou art so , there i throw my gage , 
 to prove it on thee to the extremest point 
 of mortal breath . seiz it , if thou dar'st . 
 aumerl . an if i do not , may my hand rot of 
 and never brandish more reveng steel 
 over the glitter helmet of my foe ! 
 anoth lord . i task the earth to the like , forsworn aumerl ; 
 and spur thee on with fun as mani lie 
 as may be halloa 'd in thi treacher ear 
 from sun to sun . there is my honour 's pawn ; 
 engag it to the trial , if thou darest . 
 aumerl . who set me els ? by heaven , i 'll throw at all ! 
 i have a thousand spirit in one breast 
 to answer twenti thousand such as you . 
 surrey . my lord fitzwat , i do rememb well 
 the veri time aumerl and you did talk . 
 fitzwat . 't is veri true ; you were in presenc then , 
 and you can wit with me thi is true . 
 surrey . as fals , by heaven , as heaven itself is true . 
 fitzwat . surrey , thou liest . 
 surrey . dishonour boy ! 
 that lie shall lie so heavi on my sword 
 that it shall render vengeanc and reveng 
 till thou the lie-giv and that lie do he 
 in earth as quiet as thi father 's skull . 
 in proof whereof , there is my honour 's pawn ; 
 engag it to the trial , if thou dar'st . 
 fitzwat . how fondli dost thou spur a forward hors ! 
 if i dare eat , or drink , or breath , or live , 
 i dare meet surrey in a wilder , 
 and spit upon him whilst i say he lie , 
 and lie , and lie . there is my bond of faith , 
 to tie thee to my strong correct . 
 as i intend to thrive in thi new world , 
 aumerl is guilti of my true appeal . 
 besid , i heard the banish 'd norfolk say 
 that thou , aumerl , didst send two of thi men 
 to execut the nobl duke at calai . 
 aumerl . some honest christian trust me with a gage 
 that norfolk lie . here do i throw down thi , 
 if he may be repeal 'd to tri hi honour . 
 bolingbrok . these differ shall all rest under gage 
 till norfolk be repeal'd-rep 'd he shall be 
 and , though mine enemi , restor 'd again 
 to all hi land and signori . when he is return 'd , 
 against aumerl we will enforc hi trial . 
 carlisl . that honour day shall never be seen . 
 mani a time hath banish 'd norfolk fought 
 for jesu christ in gloriou christian field , 
 stream the ensign of the christian cross 
 against black pagan , turk , and saracen ; 
 and , toil 'd with work of war , retir 'd himself 
 to itali ; and there , at venic , gave 
 hi bodi to that pleasant countri 's earth , 
 and hi pure soul unto hi captain , christ , 
 under whose colour he had fought so long . 
 bolingbrok . whi , bishop , is norfolk dead ? 
 carlisl . as sure as i live , my lord . 
 bolingbrok . sweet peac conduct hi sweet soul to the bosom 
 of good old abraham ! lord appel , 
 your differ shall all rest under gage 
 till we assign you to your day of trial 
 
 enter york , attend 
 
 york . great duke of lancast , i come to the 
 from plume-pluck 'd richard , who with will soul 
 adopt thee heir , and hi high sceptr yield 
 to the possess of thi royal hand . 
 ascend hi throne , descend now from him- 
 and long live henri , fourth of that name ! 
 bolingbrok . in god 's name , i 'll ascend the regal throne . 
 carlisl . marri , god forbid ! 
 worst in thi royal presenc may i speak , 
 yet best beseem me to speak the truth . 
 would god that ani in thi nobl presenc 
 were enough nobl to be upright judg 
 of nobl richard ! then true nobless would 
 learn him forbear from so foul a wrong . 
 what subject can give sentenc on hi king ? 
 and who sit here that is not richard 's subject ? 
 thiev are not judg 'd but they are by to hear , 
 although appar guilt be seen in them ; 
 and shall the figur of god 's majesti , 
 hi captain , steward , deputi elect , 
 anoint , crown , plant mani year , 
 be judg 'd by subject and inferior breath , 
 and he himself not present ? o , forfend it , god , 
 that in a christian climat soul refin 'd 
 should show so heinou , black , obscen a deed ! 
 i speak to subject , and a subject speak , 
 stirr 'd up by god , thu boldli for hi king . 
 my lord of hereford here , whom you call king , 
 is a foul traitor to proud hereford 's king ; 
 and if you crown him , let me prophesy- 
 the blood of english shall manur the ground , 
 and futur age groan for thi foul act ; 
 peac shall go sleep with turk and infidel , 
 and in thi seat of peac tumultu war 
 shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound ; 
 disord , horror , fear , and mutini , 
 shall here inhabit , and thi land be call 'd 
 the field of golgotha and dead men 's skull . 
 o , if you rais thi hous against thi hous , 
 it will the woefullest divis prove 
 that ever fell upon thi curs earth . 
 prevent it , resist it , let it not be so , 
 lest child , child 's children , cri against you woe . 
 northumberland . well have you argu , sir ; and , for your pain , 
 of capit treason we arrest you here . 
 my lord of westminst , be it your charg 
 to keep him safe till hi day of trial . 
 may it pleas you , lord , to grant the common ' suit ? 
 bolingbrok . fetch hither richard , that in common view 
 he may surrend ; so we shall proceed 
 without suspicion . 
 york . i will be hi conduct . exit 
 bolingbrok . lord , you that here are under our arrest , 
 procur your sureti for your day of answer . 
 littl are we behold to your love , 
 and littl look 'd for at your help hand . 
 
 re-ent york , with king richard , and offic 
 bear the regalia 
 
 king richard . alack , whi am i sent for to a king , 
 befor i have shook off the regal thought 
 wherewith i reign 'd ? i hardli yet have learn 'd 
 to insinu , flatter , bow , and bend my knee . 
 give sorrow leav awhil to tutor me 
 to thi submiss . yet i well rememb 
 the favour of these men . were they not mine ? 
 did they not sometim cri 'all hail ! ' to me ? 
 so juda did to christ ; but he , in twelv , 
 found truth in all but one ; i , in twelv thousand , none . 
 god save the king ! will no man say amen ? 
 am i both priest and clerk ? well then , amen . 
 god save the king ! although i be not he ; 
 and yet , amen , if heaven do think him me . 
 to do what servic am i sent for hither ? 
 york . to do that offic of thine own good will 
 which tire majesti did make thee offer- 
 the resign of thi state and crown 
 to henri bolingbrok . 
 king richard . give me the crown . here , cousin , seiz the crown . 
 here , cousin , 
 on thi side my hand , and on that side thine . 
 now is thi golden crown like a deep well 
 that owe two bucket , fill one anoth ; 
 the emptier ever danc in the air , 
 the other down , unseen , and full of water . 
 that bucket down and fun of tear am i , 
 drink my grief , whilst you mount up on high . 
 bolingbrok . i thought you had been will to resign . 
 king richard . my crown i am ; but still my grief are mine . 
 you may my glori and my state depos , 
 but not my grief ; still am i king of those . 
 bolingbrok . part of your care you give me with your crown . 
 king richard . your care set up do not pluck my care down . 
 my care is loss of care , by old care done ; 
 your care is gain of care , by new care won . 
 the care i give i have , though given away ; 
 they tend the crown , yet still with me they stay . 
 bolingbrok . are you content to resign the crown ? 
 king richard . ay , no ; no , ay ; for i must noth be ; 
 therefor no no , for i resign to thee . 
 now mark me how i will undo myself : 
 i give thi heavi weight from off my head , 
 and thi unwieldi sceptr from my hand , 
 the pride of kingli sway from out my heart ; 
 with mine own tear i wash away my balm , 
 with mine own hand i give away my crown , 
 with mine own tongu deni my sacr state , 
 with mine own breath releas all duteou oath ; 
 all pomp and majesti i do forswear ; 
 my manor , rent , revenu , i forgo ; 
 my act , decre , and statut , i deni . 
 god pardon all oath that are broke to me ! 
 god keep all vow unbrok are made to thee ! 
 make me , that noth have , with noth griev 'd , 
 and thou with all plea 'd , that hast an achiev 'd . 
 long mayst thou live in richard 's seat to sit , 
 and soon lie richard in an earthli pit . 
 god save king henri , unk 'd richard say , 
 and send him mani year of sunshin day ! 
 what more remain ? 
 northumberland . no more ; but that you read 
 these accus , and these grievou crime 
 commit by your person and your follow 
 against the state and profit of thi land ; 
 that , by confess them , the soul of men 
 may deem that you are worthili depo 'd . 
 king richard . must i do so ? and must i ravel out 
 my weav'd-up folli ? gentl northumberland , 
 if thi offenc were upon record , 
 would it not shame thee in so fair a troop 
 to read a lectur of them ? if thou wouldst , 
 there shouldst thou find one heinou articl , 
 contain the depos of a king 
 and crack the strong warrant of an oath , 
 mark 'd with a blot , damn 'd in the book of heaven . 
 nay , all of you that stand and look upon me 
 whilst that my wretched doth bait myself , 
 though some of you , with pilat , wash your hand , 
 show an outward pity-yet you pilat 
 have here deliv 'd me to my sour cross , 
 and water can not wash away your sin . 
 northumberland . my lord , dispatch ; read o'er these 
 articl . 
 king richard . mine eye are full of tear ; i can not see . 
 and yet salt water blind them not so much 
 but they can see a sort of traitor here . 
 nay , if i turn mine eye upon myself , 
 i find myself a traitor with the rest ; 
 for i have given here my soul 's consent 
 t'undeck the pompou bodi of a king ; 
 made glori base , and sovereignti a slave , 
 proud majesti a subject , state a peasant . 
 northumberland . my lord- 
 king richard . no lord of thine , thou haught insult man , 
 nor no man 's lord ; i have no name , no tide- 
 no , not that name wa given me at the font- 
 but 't is usurp 'd . alack the heavi day , 
 that i have worn so mani winter out , 
 and know not now what name to call myself ! 
 o that i were a mockeri king of snow , 
 stand befor the sun of bolingbrok 
 to melt myself away in water drop ! 
 good king , great king , and yet not greatli good , 
 an if my word be sterl yet in england , 
 let it command a mirror hither straight , 
 that it may show me what a face i have 
 sinc it is bankrupt of hi majesti . 
 bolingbrok . go some of you and fetch a looking-glass . 
 exit an attend 
 northumberland . read o'er thi paper while the glass doth come . 
 king richard . fiend , thou torment me ere i come to hell . 
 bolingbrok . urg it no more , my lord northumberland . 
 northumberland . the common will not , then , be satisfi . 
 king richard . they shall be satisfi . i 'll read enough , 
 when i do see the veri book inde 
 where all my sin are writ , and that 's myself . 
 
 re-ent attend with glass 
 
 give me that glass , and therein will i read . 
 no deeper wrinkl yet ? hath sorrow struck 
 so mani blow upon thi face of mine 
 and made no deeper wound ? o flatt'r glass , 
 like to my follow in prosper , 
 thou dost beguil me ! wa thi face the face 
 that everi day under hi household roof 
 did keep ten thousand men ? wa thi the face 
 that like the sun did make behold wink ? 
 is thi the face which fac 'd so mani folli 
 that wa at last out-fac 'd by bolingbrok ? 
 a brittl glori shineth in thi face ; 
 as brittl as the glori is the face ; 
 [ dash the glass against the ground ] 
 for there it is , crack 'd in a hundr shiver . 
 mark , silent king , the moral of thi sport- 
 how soon my sorrow hath destroy 'd my face . 
 bolingbrok . the shadow of your sorrow hath destroy 'd 
 the shadow of your face . 
 king richard . say that again . 
 the shadow of my sorrow ? ha ! let 's see . 
 't is veri true : my grief lie all within ; 
 and these extern manner of lament 
 are mere shadow to the unseen grief 
 that swell with silenc in the tortur 'd soul . 
 there lie the substanc ; and i thank thee , king , 
 for thi great bounti , that not onli giv'st 
 me caus to wail , but teachest me the way 
 how to lament the caus . i 'll beg one boon , 
 and then be gone and troubl you no more . 
 shall i obtain it ? 
 bolingbrok . name it , fair cousin . 
 king richard . fair cousin ! i am greater than a king ; 
 for when i wa a king , my flatter 
 were then but subject ; be now a subject , 
 i have a king here to my flatter . 
 be so great , i have no need to beg . 
 bolingbrok . yet ask . 
 king richard . and shall i have ? 
 bolingbrok . you shall . 
 king richard . then give me leav to go . 
 bolingbrok . whither ? 
 king richard . whither you will , so i were from your sight . 
 bolingbrok . go , some of you convey him to the tower . 
 king richard . o , good ! convey ! convey are you all , 
 that rise thu nimbl by a true king 's fall . 
 exeunt king richard , some lord and a guard 
 bolingbrok . on wednesday next we solemnli set down 
 our coron . lord , prepar yourselv . 
 exeunt all but the abbot of westminst , the 
 bishop of carlisl , and aumerl 
 abbot . a woeful pageant have we here beheld . 
 carlisl . the woe 's to come ; the children yet unborn 
 shall feel thi day as sharp to them as thorn . 
 aumerl . you holi clergymen , is there no plot 
 to rid the realm of thi pernici blot ? 
 abbot . my lord , 
 befor i freeli speak my mind herein , 
 you shall not onli take the sacrament 
 to buri mine intent , but also to effect 
 whatev i shall happen to devis . 
 i see your brow are full of discont , 
 your heart of sorrow , and your eye of tear . 
 come home with me to supper ; i will lay 
 a plot shall show us all a merri day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 london . a street lead to the tower 
 
 enter the queen , with her attend 
 
 queen . thi way the king will come ; thi is the way 
 to juliu caesar 's ill-erect tower , 
 to whose flint bosom my condemn lord 
 is doom 'd a prison by proud bolingbrok . 
 here let us rest , if thi rebelli earth 
 have ani rest for her true king 's queen . 
 
 enter king richard and guard 
 
 but soft , but see , or rather do not see , 
 my fair rose wither . yet look up , behold , 
 that you in piti may dissolv to dew , 
 and wash him fresh again with true-lov tear . 
 ah , thou , the model where old troy did stand ; 
 thou map of honour , thou king richard 's tomb , 
 and not king richard ; thou most beauteou inn , 
 whi should hard-favour 'd grief be lodg 'd in thee , 
 when triumph is becom an alehous guest ? 
 king richard . join not with grief , fair woman , do not so , 
 to make my end too sudden . learn , good soul , 
 to think our former state a happi dream ; 
 from which awak 'd , the truth of what we are 
 show us but thi : i am sworn brother , sweet , 
 to grim necess ; and he and 
 will keep a leagu till death . hie thee to franc , 
 and cloister thee in some religi hous . 
 our holi live must win a new world 's crown , 
 which our profan hour here have thrown down . 
 queen . what , is my richard both in shape and mind 
 transform 'd and weak'n ? hath bolingbrok depo 'd 
 thine intellect ? hath he been in thi heart ? 
 the lion die thrusteth forth hi paw 
 and wound the earth , if noth els , with rage 
 to be o'erpow ' r 'd ; and wilt thou , pupil-lik , 
 take the correct mildli , kiss the rod , 
 and fawn on rage with base humil , 
 which art a lion and the king of beast ? 
 king richard . a king of beast , inde ! if aught but beast , 
 i had been still a happi king of men . 
 good sometim queen , prepar thee henc for franc . 
 think i am dead , and that even here thou takest , 
 as from my death-b , thi last live leav . 
 in winter 's tediou night sit by the fire 
 with good old folk , and let them tell thee tale 
 of woeful age long ago betid ; 
 and ere thou bid good night , to quit their grief 
 tell thou the lament tale of me , 
 and send the hearer weep to their bed ; 
 for whi , the senseless brand will sympath 
 the heavi accent of thi move tongu , 
 and in compass weep the fire out ; 
 and some will mourn in ash , some coal-black , 
 for the depos of a right king . 
 
 enter northumberland attend 
 
 northumberland . my lord , the mind of bolingbrok is chang 'd ; 
 you must to pomfret , not unto the tower . 
 and , madam , there is order ta'en for you : 
 with all swift speed you must away to franc . 
 king richard . northumberland , thou ladder wherewith 
 the mount bolingbrok ascend my throne , 
 the time shall not be mani hour of age 
 more than it is , ere foul sin gather head 
 shall break into corrupt . thou shalt think 
 though he divid the realm and give thee half 
 it is too littl , help him to all ; 
 and he shall think that thou , which knowest the way 
 to plant unright king , wilt know again , 
 be ne'er so littl urg 'd , anoth way 
 to pluck him headlong from the usurp throne . 
 the love of wick men convert to fear ; 
 that fear to hate ; and hate turn one or both 
 to worthi danger and deserv death . 
 northumberland . my guilt be on my head , and there an end . 
 take leav , and part ; for you must part forthwith . 
 king richard . doubli divorc 'd ! bad men , you violat 
 a twofold marriage-'twixt my crown and me , 
 and then betwixt me and my marri wife . 
 let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me ; 
 and yet not so , for with a kiss 't wa made . 
 part us , northumberland ; i toward the north , 
 where shiver cold and sick pine the clime ; 
 my wife to franc , from whenc set forth in pomp , 
 she came adorn hither like sweet may , 
 sent back like hallowma or short'st of day . 
 queen . and must we be divid ? must we part ? 
 king richard . ay , hand from hand , my love , and heart from heart . 
 queen . banish us both , and send the king with me . 
 northumberland . that were some love , but littl polici . 
 queen . then whither he goe thither let me go . 
 king richard . so two , togeth weep , make one woe . 
 weep thou for me in franc , i for thee here ; 
 better far off than near , be ne'er the near . 
 go , count thi way with sigh ; i mine with groan . 
 queen . so longest way shall have the longest moan . 
 king richard . twice for one step i 'll groan , the way be short , 
 and piec the way out with a heavi heart . 
 come , come , in woo sorrow let 's be brief , 
 sinc , wed it , there is such length in grief . 
 one kiss shall stop our mouth , and dumbl part ; 
 thu give i mine , and thu take i thi heart . 
 queen . give me mine own again ; 'twere no good part 
 to take on me to keep and kill thi heart . 
 so , now i have mine own again , be gone . 
 that i may strive to kill it with a groan . 
 king richard . we make woe wanton with thi fond delay . 
 onc more , adieu ; the rest let sorrow say . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 the duke of york 's palac 
 
 enter the duke of york and the duchess 
 
 duchess . my lord , you told me you would tell the rest , 
 when weep made you break the stori off , 
 of our two cousin ' come into london . 
 york . where did i leav ? 
 duchess . at that sad stop , my lord , 
 where rude misgovern hand from window ' top 
 threw dust and rubbish on king richard 's head . 
 york . then , as i said , the duke , great bolingbrok , 
 mount upon a hot and fieri steed 
 which hi aspir rider seem 'd to know , 
 with slow but state pace kept on hi cours , 
 whilst all tongu cri 'god save thee , bolingbrok ! ' 
 you would have thought the veri window spake , 
 so mani greedi look of young and old 
 through casement dart their desir eye 
 upon hi visag ; and that all the wall 
 with paint imageri had said at onc 
 'jesu preserv thee ! welcom , bolingbrok ! ' 
 whilst he , from the one side to the other turn , 
 barehead , lower than hi proud steed 's neck , 
 bespak them thu , ' i thank you , countrymen . ' 
 and thu still do , thu he pass 'd along . 
 duchess . alack , poor richard ! where rode he the whilst ? 
 york . as in a theatr the eye of men 
 after a well-grac 'd actor leav the stage 
 are idli bent on him that enter next , 
 think hi prattl to be tediou ; 
 even so , or with much more contempt , men 's eye 
 did scowl on gentl richard ; no man cri 'god save him ! ' 
 no joy tongu gave him hi welcom home ; 
 but dust wa thrown upon hi sacr head ; 
 which with such gentl sorrow he shook off , 
 hi face still combat with tear and smile , 
 the badg of hi grief and patienc , 
 that had not god , for some strong purpos , steel 'd 
 the heart of men , they must perforc have melt , 
 and barbar itself have piti him . 
 but heaven hath a hand in these event , 
 to whose high will we bound our calm content . 
 to bolingbrok are we sworn subject now , 
 whose state and honour i for aye allow . 
 duchess . here come my son aumerl . 
 york . aumerl that wa 
 but that is lost for be richard 's friend , 
 and madam , you must call him rudand now . 
 i am in parliament pledg for hi truth 
 and last fealti to the new-mad king . 
 
 enter aumerl 
 
 duchess . welcom , my son . who are the violet now 
 that strew the green lap of the new come spring ? 
 aumerl . madam , i know not , nor i greatli care not . 
 god know i had as lief be none as one . 
 york . well , bear you well in thi new spring of time , 
 lest you be cropp 'd befor you come to prime . 
 what news from oxford ? do these just and triumph hold ? 
 aumerl . for aught i know , my lord , they do . 
 york . you will be there , i know . 
 aumerl . if god prevent not , i purpos so . 
 york . what seal is that that without thi bosom ? 
 yea , look'st thou pale ? let me see the write . 
 aumerl . my lord , 't is noth . 
 york . no matter , then , who see it . 
 i will be satisfi ; let me see the write . 
 aumerl . i do beseech your grace to pardon me ; 
 it is a matter of small consequ 
 which for some reason i would not have seen . 
 york . which for some reason , sir , i mean to see . 
 i fear , i fear- 
 duchess . what should you fear ? 
 't is noth but some bond that he is ent'r into 
 for gay apparel 'gainst the triumph-day . 
 york . bound to himself ! what doth he with a bond 
 that he is bound to ? wife , thou art a fool . 
 boy , let me see the write . 
 aumerl . i do beseech you , pardon me ; i may not show it . 
 york . i will be satisfi ; let me see it , i say . 
 [ he pluck it out of hi bosom , and read it ] 
 treason , foul treason ! villain ! traitor ! slave ! 
 duchess . what is the matter , my lord ? 
 york . ho ! who is within there ? 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 saddl my hors . 
 god for hi merci , what treacheri is here ! 
 duchess . whi , york , what is it , my lord ? 
 york . give me my boot , i say ; saddl my hors . 
 exit servant 
 now , by mine honour , by my life , my troth , 
 i will appeach the villain . 
 duchess . what is the matter ? 
 york . peac , foolish woman . 
 duchess . i will not peac . what is the matter , aumerl ? 
 aumerl . good mother , be content ; it is no more 
 than my poor life must answer . 
 duchess . thi life answer ! 
 york . bring me my boot . i will unto the king . 
 
 hi man enter with hi boot 
 
 duchess . strike him , aumerl . poor boy , thou art amaz 'd . 
 henc , villain ! never more come in my sight . 
 york . give me my boot , i say . 
 duchess . whi , york , what wilt thou do ? 
 wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own ? 
 have we more son ? or are we like to have ? 
 is not my teem date drunk up with time ? 
 and wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age 
 and rob me of a happi mother 's name ? 
 is he not like thee ? is he not thine own ? 
 york . thou fond mad woman , 
 wilt thou conceal thi dark conspiraci ? 
 a dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament , 
 and interchang set down their hand 
 to kill the king at oxford . 
 duchess . he shall be none ; 
 we 'll keep him here . then what is that to him ? 
 york . away , fond woman ! were he twenti time my son 
 i would appeach him . 
 duchess . hadst thou groan 'd for him 
 as i have done , thou wouldst be more piti . 
 but now i know thi mind : thou dost suspect 
 that i have been disloy to thi bed 
 and that he is a bastard , not thi son . 
 sweet york , sweet husband , be not of that mind . 
 he is as like thee as a man may be 
 not like to me , or ani of my kin , 
 and yet i love him . 
 york . make way , unruli woman ! exit 
 duchess . after , aumerl ! mount thee upon hi hors ; 
 spur post , and get befor him to the king , 
 and beg thi pardon ere he do accus thee . 
 i 'll not be long behind ; though i be old , 
 i doubt not but to ride as fast as york ; 
 and never will i rise up from the ground 
 till bolingbrok have pardon 'd thee . away , be gone . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 windsor castl 
 
 enter bolingbrok as king , perci , and other lord 
 
 bolingbrok . can no man tell me of my unthrifti son ? 
 't is full three month sinc i did see him last . 
 if ani plagu hang over us , 't is he . 
 i would to god , my lord , he might be found . 
 inquir at london , 'mongst the tavern there , 
 for there , they say , he daili doth frequent 
 with unrestrain loos companion , 
 even such , they say , as stand in narrow lane 
 and beat our watch and rob our passeng , 
 which he , young wanton and effemin boy , 
 take on the point of honour to support 
 so dissolut a crew . 
 perci . my lord , some two day sinc i saw the princ , 
 and told him of those triumph held at oxford . 
 bolingbrok . and what said the gallant ? 
 perci . hi answer wa , he would unto the stew , 
 and from the common'st creatur pluck a glove 
 and wear it as a favour ; and with that 
 he would unhors the lustiest challeng . 
 bolingbrok . as dissolut as desper ; yet through both 
 i see some spark of better hope , which elder year 
 may happili bring forth . but who come here ? 
 
 enter aumerl amaz 
 
 aumerl . where is the king ? 
 bolingbrok . what mean our cousin that he stare and look 
 so wildli ? 
 aumerl . god save your grace ! i do beseech your majesti , 
 to have some confer with your grace alon . 
 bolingbrok . withdraw yourselv , and leav us here alon . 
 exeunt perci and lord 
 what is the matter with our cousin now ? 
 aumerl . for ever may my knee grow to the earth , 
 [ kneel ] 
 my tongu cleav to my roof within my mouth , 
 unless a pardon ere i rise or speak . 
 bolingbrok . intend or commit wa thi fault ? 
 if on the first , how heinou e'er it be , 
 to win thi after-lov i pardon thee . 
 aumerl . then give me leav that i may turn the key , 
 that no man enter till my tale be done . 
 bolingbrok . have thi desir . 
 [ the duke of york knock at the door and crieth ] 
 york . [ within ] my lieg , bewar ; look to thyself ; 
 thou hast a traitor in thi presenc there . 
 bolingbrok . [ draw ] villain , i 'll make thee safe . 
 aumerl . stay thi reveng hand ; thou hast no caus to fear . 
 york . [ within ] open the door , secur , foolhardi king . 
 shall i , for love , speak treason to thi face ? 
 open the door , or i will break it open . 
 
 enter york 
 
 bolingbrok . what is the matter , uncl ? speak ; 
 recov breath ; tell us how near is danger , 
 that we may arm us to encount it . 
 york . perus thi write here , and thou shalt know 
 the treason that my hast forbid me show . 
 aumerl . rememb , as thou read'st , thi promis pass 'd . 
 i do repent me ; read not my name there ; 
 my heart is not confeder with my hand . 
 york . it wa , villain , ere thi hand did set it down . 
 i tore it from the traitor 's bosom , king ; 
 fear , and not love , beget hi penit . 
 forget to piti him , lest thi piti prove 
 a serpent that will sting thee to the heart . 
 bolingbrok . o heinou , strong , and bold conspiraci ! 
 o loyal father of a treacher son ! 
 thou sheer , immacul , and silver fountain , 
 from whenc thi stream through muddi passag 
 hath held hi current and defil 'd himself ! 
 thi overflow of good convert to bad ; 
 and thi abund good shall excus 
 thi deadli blot in thi digress son . 
 york . so shall my virtu be hi vice 's bawd ; 
 and he shall spend mine honour with hi shame , 
 as thriftless son their scrape father ' gold . 
 mine honour live when hi dishonour die , 
 or my sham 'd life in hi dishonour lie . 
 thou kill'st me in hi life ; give him breath , 
 the traitor live , the true man 's put to death . 
 duchess . [ within ] i what ho , my lieg , for god 's sake , let me in . 
 bolingbrok . what shrill-voic 'd suppliant make thi eager cri ? 
 duchess . [ within ] a woman , and thine aunt , great king ; 't is i . 
 speak with me , piti me , open the door . 
 a beggar beg that never begg 'd befor . 
 bolingbrok . our scene is alt'r from a seriou thing , 
 and now chang 'd to 'the beggar and the king . ' 
 my danger cousin , let your mother in . 
 i know she is come to pray for your foul sin . 
 york . if thou do pardon whosoev pray , 
 more sin for thi forgiv prosper may . 
 thi fest'r joint cut off , the rest rest sound ; 
 thi let alon will all the rest confound . 
 
 enter duchess 
 
 duchess . o king , believ not thi hard-heart man ! 
 love love not itself , none other can . 
 york . thou frantic woman , what dost thou make here ? 
 shall thi old dug onc more a traitor rear ? 
 duchess . sweet york , be patient . hear me , gentl lieg . 
 [ kneel ] 
 bolingbrok . rise up , good aunt . 
 duchess . not yet , i thee beseech . 
 for ever will i walk upon my knee , 
 and never see day that the happi see 
 till thou give joy ; until thou bid me joy 
 by pardon rutland , my transgress boy . 
 aumerl . unto my mother 's prayer i bend my knee . 
 [ kneel ] 
 york . against them both , my true joint bend be . 
 [ kneel ] 
 ill mayst thou thrive , if thou grant ani grace ! 
 duchess . plead he in earnest ? look upon hi face ; 
 hi eye do drop no tear , hi prayer are in jest ; 
 hi word come from hi mouth , our from our breast . 
 he pray but faintli and would be deni ; 
 we pray with heart and soul , and all besid . 
 hi weari joint would gladli rise , i know ; 
 our knee still kneel till to the ground they grow . 
 hi prayer are full of fals hypocrisi ; 
 our of true zeal and deep integr . 
 our prayer do out-pray hi ; then let them have 
 that merci which true prayer ought to have . 
 bolingbrok . good aunt , stand up . 
 duchess . do not say 'stand up ' ; 
 say 'pardon ' first , and afterward 'stand up . ' 
 an if i were thi nurs , thi tongu to teach , 
 'pardon ' should be the first word of thi speech . 
 i never long 'd to hear a word till now ; 
 say 'pardon , ' king ; let piti teach thee how . 
 the word is short , but not so short as sweet ; 
 no word like 'pardon ' for king ' mouth so meet . 
 york . speak it in french , king , say 'pardonn moy . ' 
 duchess . dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy ? 
 ah , my sour husband , my hard-heart lord , 
 that set the word itself against the word ! 
 speak 'pardon ' as 't is current in our land ; 
 the chop french we do not understand . 
 thine eye begin to speak , set thi tongu there ; 
 or in thi piteou heart plant thou thine ear , 
 that hear how our plaint and prayer do pierc , 
 piti may move thee 'pardon ' to rehears . 
 bolingbrok . good aunt , stand up . 
 duchess . i do not sue to stand ; 
 pardon is all the suit i have in hand . 
 bolingbrok . i pardon him , as god shall pardon me . 
 duchess . o happi vantag of a kneel knee ! 
 yet am i sick for fear . speak it again . 
 twice say 'pardon ' doth not pardon twain , 
 but make one pardon strong . 
 bolingbrok . with all my heart 
 i pardon him . 
 duchess . a god on earth thou art . 
 bolingbrok . but for our trusti brother-in-law and the abbot , 
 with all the rest of that consort crew , 
 destruct straight shall dog them at the heel . 
 good uncl , help to order sever power 
 to oxford , or where' these traitor are . 
 they shall not live within thi world , i swear , 
 but i will have them , if i onc know where . 
 uncl , farewel ; and , cousin , adieu ; 
 your mother well hath pray 'd , and prove you true . 
 duchess . come , my old son ; i pray god make thee new . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 windsor castl 
 
 enter sir pierc of exton and a servant 
 
 exton . didst thou not mark the king , what word he spake ? 
 'have i no friend will rid me of thi live fear ? ' 
 wa it not so ? 
 servant . these were hi veri word . 
 exton . 'have i no friend ? ' quoth he . he spake it twice 
 and urg 'd it twice togeth , did he not ? 
 servant . he did . 
 exton . and , speak it , he wishtli look 'd on me , 
 as who should say ' i would thou wert the man 
 that would divorc thi terror from my heart ' ; 
 mean the king at pomfret . come , let 's go . 
 i am the king 's friend , and will rid hi foe . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 pomfret castl . the dungeon of the castl 
 
 enter king richard 
 
 king richard . i have been studi how i may compar 
 thi prison where i live unto the world 
 and , for becaus the world is popul 
 and here is not a creatur but myself , 
 i can not do it . yet i 'll hammer it out . 
 my brain i 'll prove the femal to my soul , 
 my soul the father ; and these two beget 
 a gener of still-breed thought , 
 and these same thought peopl thi littl world , 
 in humour like the peopl of thi world , 
 for no thought is content . the better sort , 
 as thought of thing divin , are intermix 'd 
 with scrupl , and do set the word itself 
 against the word , 
 as thu : 'come , littl one ' ; and then again , 
 'it is as hard to come as for a camel 
 to thread the postern of a small needl 's eye . ' 
 thought tend to ambit , they do plot 
 unlik wonder : how these vain weak nail 
 may tear a passag through the flinti rib 
 of thi hard world , my rag prison wall ; 
 and , for they can not , die in their own pride . 
 thought tend to content flatter themselv 
 that they are not the first of fortun 's slave , 
 nor shall not be the last ; like silli beggar 
 who , sit in the stock , refug their shame , 
 that mani have and other must sit there ; 
 and in thi thought they find a kind of eas , 
 bear their own misfortun on the back 
 of such as have befor endur 'd the like . 
 thu play i in one person mani peopl , 
 and none content . sometim am i king ; 
 then treason make me wish myself a beggar , 
 and so i am . then crush penuri 
 persuad me i wa better when a king ; 
 then am i king 'd again ; and by and by 
 think that i am unk 'd by bolingbrok , 
 and straight am noth . but whate' i be , 
 nor i , nor ani man that but man is , 
 with noth shall be plea 'd till he be ea 'd 
 with be noth . [ the music play ] 
 music do i hear ? 
 ha , ha ! keep time . how sour sweet music is 
 when time is broke and no proport kept ! 
 so is it in the music of men 's live . 
 and here have i the dainti of ear 
 to check time broke in a disord 'd string ; 
 but , for the concord of my state and time , 
 had not an ear to hear my true time broke . 
 i wast time , and now doth time wast me ; 
 for now hath time made me hi numb'r clock : 
 my thought are minut ; and with sigh they jar 
 their watch on unto mine eye , the outward watch , 
 whereto my finger , like a dial 's point , 
 is point still , in cleans them from tear . 
 now sir , the sound that tell what hour it is 
 are clamor groan which strike upon my heart , 
 which is the bell . so sigh , and tear , and groan , 
 show minut , time , and hour ; but my time 
 run post on in bolingbrok 's proud joy , 
 while i stand fool here , hi jack of the clock . 
 thi music mad me . let it sound no more ; 
 for though it have holp madmen to their wit , 
 in me it seem it will make wise men mad . 
 yet bless on hi heart that give it me ! 
 for 't is a sign of love ; and love to richard 
 is a strang brooch in thi all-hat world . 
 
 enter a groom of the stabl 
 
 groom . hail , royal princ ! 
 king richard . thank , nobl peer ! 
 the cheapest of us is ten groat too dear . 
 what art thou ? and how comest thou hither , 
 where no man never come but that sad dog 
 that bring me food to make misfortun live ? 
 groom . i wa a poor groom of thi stabl , king , 
 when thou wert king ; who , travel toward york , 
 with much ado at length have gotten leav 
 to look upon my sometim royal master 's face . 
 o , how it ern 'd my heart , when i beheld , 
 in london street , that coronation-day , 
 when bolingbrok rode on roan barbary- 
 that hors that thou so often hast bestrid , 
 that hors that i so care have dress 'd ! 
 king richard . rode he on barbari ? tell me , gentl friend , 
 how went he under him ? 
 groom . so proudli as if he disdain 'd the ground . 
 king richard . so proud that bolingbrok wa on hi back ! 
 that jade hath eat bread from my royal hand ; 
 thi hand hath made him proud with clap him . 
 would he not stumbl ? would he not fall down , 
 sinc pride must have a fall , and break the neck 
 of that proud man that did usurp hi back ? 
 forgiv , hors ! whi do i rail on thee , 
 sinc thou , creat to be aw 'd by man , 
 wast born to bear ? i wa not made a hors ; 
 and yet i bear a burden like an ass , 
 spurr 'd , gall 'd , and tir 'd , by jaunc bolingbrok . 
 
 enter keeper with meat 
 
 keeper . fellow , give place ; here is no longer stay . 
 king richard . if thou love me , 't is time thou wert away . 
 groom . my tongu dare not , that my heart shall say . 
 exit 
 keeper . my lord , will't pleas you to fall to ? 
 king richard . tast of it first as thou art wont to do . 
 keeper . my lord , i dare not . sir pierc of exton , 
 who late came from the king , command the contrari . 
 king richard . the devil take henri of lancast and thee ! 
 patienc is stale , and i am weari of it . 
 [ beat the keeper ] 
 keeper . help , help , help ! 
 the murder , exton and servant , rush in , arm 
 king richard . how now ! what mean death in thi rude assault ? 
 villain , thi own hand yield thi death 's instrument . 
 [ snatch a weapon and kill one ] 
 go thou and fill anoth room in hell . 
 [ he kill anoth , then exton strike him down ] 
 that hand shall burn in never-quench fire 
 that stagger thu my person . exton , thi fierc hand 
 hath with the king 's blood stain 'd the king 's own land . 
 mount , mount , my soul ! thi seat is up on high ; 
 whilst my gross flesh sink downward , here to die . 
 [ die ] 
 exton . as full of valour as of royal blood . 
 both have i spill 'd . o , would the deed were good ! 
 for now the devil , that told me i did well , 
 say that thi deed is chronicl in hell . 
 thi dead king to the live king i 'll bear . 
 take henc the rest , and give them burial here . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 windsor castl 
 
 flourish . enter bolingbrok , the duke of york , with other lord 
 and attend 
 
 bolingbrok . kind uncl york , the latest news we hear 
 is that the rebel have consum 'd with fire 
 our town of cicet in gloucestershir ; 
 but whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not . 
 
 enter northumberland 
 
 welcom , my lord . what is the news ? 
 northumberland . first , to thi sacr state wish i all happi . 
 the next news is , i have to london sent 
 the head of salisburi , spencer , blunt , and kent . 
 the manner of their take may appear 
 at larg discours in thi paper here . 
 bolingbrok . we thank thee , gentl perci , for thi pain ; 
 and to thi worth will add right worthi gain . 
 
 enter fitzwat 
 
 fitzwat . my lord , i have from oxford sent to london 
 the head of broca and sir bennet seeli ; 
 two of the danger consort traitor 
 that sought at oxford thi dire overthrow . 
 bolingbrok . thi pain , fitzwat , shall not be forgot ; 
 right nobl is thi merit , well i wot . 
 
 enter perci , with the bishop of carlisl 
 
 perci . the grand conspir , abbot of westminst , 
 with clog of conscienc and sour melancholi , 
 hath yield up hi bodi to the grave ; 
 but here is carlisl live , to abid 
 thi kingli doom , and sentenc of hi pride . 
 bolingbrok . carlisl , thi is your doom : 
 choos out some secret place , some reverend room , 
 more than thou hast , and with it joy thi life ; 
 so as thou liv'st in peac , die free from strife ; 
 for though mine enemi thou hast ever been , 
 high spark of honour in thee have i seen . 
 
 enter exton , with attend , hear a coffin 
 
 exton . great king , within thi coffin i present 
 thi buri fear . herein all breathless lie 
 the mightiest of thi greatest enemi , 
 richard of bordeaux , by me hither brought . 
 bolingbrok . exton , i thank thee not ; for thou hast wrought 
 a deed of slander with thi fatal hand 
 upon my head and all thi famou land . 
 exton . from your own mouth , my lord , did i thi deed . 
 bolingbrok . they love not poison that do poison need , 
 nor do i thee . though i did wish him dead , 
 i hate the murder , love him murder . 
 the guilt of conscienc take thou for thi labour , 
 but neither my good word nor princ favour ; 
 with cain go wander thorough shade of night , 
 and never show thi head by day nor light . 
 lord , i protest my soul is full of woe 
 that blood should sprinkl me to make me grow . 
 come , mourn with me for what i do lament , 
 and put on sullen black incontin . 
 i 'll make a voyag to the holi land , 
 to wash thi blood off from my guilti hand . 
 march sadli after ; grace my mourn here 
 in weep after thi untim bier . exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 king richard iii 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 edward the fourth 
 
 son to the king 
 edward , princ of wale afterward king edward v 
 richard , duke of york , 
 
 brother to the king 
 georg , duke of clarenc , 
 richard , duke of gloucest , afterward king richard iii 
 
 a young son of clarenc ( edward , earl of warwick ) 
 henri , earl of richmond , afterward king henri vii 
 cardin bourchier , archbishop of canterburi 
 thoma rotherham , archbishop of york 
 john morton , bishop of eli 
 duke of buckingham 
 duke of norfolk 
 earl of surrey , hi son 
 earl river , brother to king edward 's queen 
 marqui of dorset and lord grey , her son 
 earl of oxford 
 lord hast 
 lord lovel 
 lord stanley , call also earl of derbi 
 sir thoma vaughan 
 sir richard ratcliff 
 sir william catesbi 
 sir jame tyrrel 
 sir jame blount 
 sir walter herbert 
 sir william brandon 
 sir robert brakenburi , lieuten of the tower 
 christoph urswick , a priest 
 lord mayor of london 
 sheriff of wiltshir 
 hast , a pursuiv 
 tressel and berkeley , gentlemen attend on ladi ann 
 elizabeth , queen to king edward iv 
 margaret , widow of king henri vi 
 duchess of york , mother to king edward iv 
 ladi ann , widow of edward , princ of wale , son to king 
 henri vi ; afterward marri to the duke of gloucest 
 a young daughter of clarenc ( margaret plantagenet , 
 countess of salisburi ) 
 ghost , of richard 's victim 
 lord , gentlemen , and attend ; priest , scriven , page , bishop , 
 aldermen , citizen , soldier , messeng , murder , keeper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : england 
 
 king richard the third 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 london . a street 
 
 enter richard , duke of gloucest , solu 
 
 gloucest . now is the winter of our discont 
 made gloriou summer by thi sun of york ; 
 and all the cloud that lour 'd upon our hous 
 in the deep bosom of the ocean buri . 
 now are our brow bound with victori wreath ; 
 our bruis arm hung up for monument ; 
 our stern alarum chang 'd to merri meet , 
 our dread march to delight measur . 
 grim-visag 'd war hath smooth 'd hi wrinkl front , 
 and now , instead of mount barb steed 
 to fright the soul of fear adversari , 
 he caper nimbl in a ladi 's chamber 
 to the lascivi pleas of a lute . 
 but i-that am not shap 'd for sportiv trick , 
 nor made to court an amor looking-glass- 
 i-that am rude stamp 'd , and want love 's majesti 
 to strut befor a wanton ambl nymph- 
 i-that am curtail 'd of thi fair proport , 
 cheat of featur by dissembl natur , 
 deform 'd , unfinish 'd , sent befor my time 
 into thi breath world scarc half made up , 
 and that so lame and unfashion 
 that dog bark at me as i halt by them- 
 whi , i , in thi weak pipe time of peac , 
 have no delight to pass away the time , 
 unless to spi my shadow in the sun 
 and descant on mine own deform . 
 and therefor , sinc i can not prove a lover 
 to entertain these fair well-spoken day , 
 i am determin to prove a villain 
 and hate the idl pleasur of these day . 
 plot have i laid , induct danger , 
 by drunken propheci , libel , and dream , 
 to set my brother clarenc and the king 
 in deadli hate the one against the other ; 
 and if king edward be as true and just 
 as i am subtl , fals , and treacher , 
 thi day should clarenc close be mew 'd up- 
 about a propheci which say that g 
 of edward 's heir the murder shall be . 
 dive , thought , down to my soul . here clarenc come . 
 
 enter clarenc , guard , and brakenburi 
 
 brother , good day . what mean thi arm guard 
 that wait upon your grace ? 
 clarenc . hi majesti , 
 tend'r my person 's safeti , hath appoint 
 thi conduct to convey me to th ' tower . 
 gloucest . upon what caus ? 
 clarenc . becaus my name is georg . 
 gloucest . alack , my lord , that fault is none of your : 
 he should , for that , commit your godfath . 
 o , belik hi majesti hath some intent 
 that you should be new-christ'n in the tower . 
 but what 's the matter , clarenc ? may i know ? 
 clarenc . yea , richard , when i know ; for i protest 
 as yet i do not ; but , as i can learn , 
 he hearken after propheci and dream , 
 and from the cross-row pluck the letter g , 
 and say a wizard told him that by g 
 hi issu disinherit should be ; 
 and , for my name of georg begin with g , 
 it follow in hi thought that i am he . 
 these , as i learn , and such like toy as these 
 hath mov 'd hi high to commit me now . 
 gloucest . whi , thi it is when men are rul 'd by women : 
 't is not the king that send you to the tower ; 
 my ladi grey hi wife , clarenc , 't is she 
 that temper him to thi extrem . 
 wa it not she and that good man of worship , 
 antoni woodvil , her brother there , 
 that made him send lord hast to the tower , 
 from whenc thi present day he is deliv ? 
 we are not safe , clarenc ; we are not safe . 
 clarenc . by heaven , i think there is no man is secur 
 but the queen 's kindr , and night-walk herald 
 that trudg betwixt the king and mistress shore . 
 heard you not what an humbl suppliant 
 lord hast wa , for her deliveri ? 
 gloucest . humbl complain to her deiti 
 got my lord chamberlain hi liberti . 
 i 'll tell you what-i think it is our way , 
 if we will keep in favour with the king , 
 to be her men and wear her liveri : 
 the jealou o'er-worn widow , and herself , 
 sinc that our brother dubb 'd them gentlewomen , 
 are mighti gossip in our monarchi . 
 brakenburi . i beseech your grace both to pardon me : 
 hi majesti hath straitli given in charg 
 that no man shall have privat confer , 
 of what degre soever , with your brother . 
 gloucest . even so ; a n't pleas your worship , brakenburi , 
 you may partak of ani thing we say : 
 we speak no treason , man ; we say the king 
 is wise and virtuou , and hi nobl queen 
 well struck in year , fair , and not jealou ; 
 we say that shore 's wife hath a pretti foot , 
 a cherri lip , a bonni eye , a pass pleas tongu ; 
 and that the queen 's kindr are made gentlefolk . 
 how say you , sir ? can you deni all thi ? 
 brakenburi . with thi , my lord , myself have naught to do . 
 gloucest . naught to do with mistress shore ! i tell thee , 
 fellow , 
 he that doth naught with her , except one , 
 were best to do it secretli alon . 
 brakenburi . what one , my lord ? 
 gloucest . her husband , knave ! wouldst thou betray me ? 
 brakenburi . i do beseech your grace to pardon me , and 
 withal 
 forbear your confer with the nobl duke . 
 clarenc . we know thi charg , brakenburi , and will 
 obey . 
 gloucest . we are the queen 's abject and must obey . 
 brother , farewel ; i will unto the king ; 
 and whatsoe' you will employ me in- 
 were it to call king edward 's widow sister- 
 i will perform it to enfranchis you . 
 meantim , thi deep disgrac in brotherhood 
 touch me deeper than you can imagin . 
 clarenc . i know it pleaseth neither of us well . 
 gloucest . well , your imprison shall not be long ; 
 i will deliv or els lie for you . 
 meantim , have patienc . 
 clarenc . i must perforc . farewel . 
 exeunt clarenc , brakenburi , and guard 
 gloucest . go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return . 
 simpl , plain clarenc , i do love thee so 
 that i will shortli send thi soul to heaven , 
 if heaven will take the present at our hand . 
 but who come here ? the new-deliv hast ? 
 
 enter lord hast 
 
 hast . good time of day unto my graciou lord ! 
 gloucest . as much unto my good lord chamberlain ! 
 well are you welcom to the open air . 
 how hath your lordship brook 'd imprison ? 
 hast . with patienc , nobl lord , as prison must ; 
 but i shall live , my lord , to give them thank 
 that were the caus of my imprison . 
 gloucest . no doubt , no doubt ; and so shall clarenc too ; 
 for they that were your enemi are hi , 
 and have prevail 'd as much on him as you . 
 hast . more piti that the eagl should be mew 'd 
 while kite and buzzard prey at liberti . 
 gloucest . what news abroad ? 
 hast . no news so bad abroad as thi at home : 
 the king is sickli , weak , and melancholi , 
 and hi physician fear him mightili . 
 gloucest . now , by saint john , that news is bad inde . 
 o , he hath kept an evil diet long 
 and overmuch consum 'd hi royal person ! 
 't is veri grievou to be thought upon . 
 where is he ? in hi bed ? 
 hast . he is . 
 gloucest . go you befor , and i will follow you . 
 exit hast 
 he can not live , i hope , and must not die 
 till georg be pack 'd with posthors up to heaven . 
 i 'll in to urg hi hatr more to clarenc 
 with lie well steel 'd with weighti argument ; 
 and , if i fail not in my deep intent , 
 clarenc hath not anoth day to live ; 
 which done , god take king edward to hi merci , 
 and leav the world for me to bustl in ! 
 for then i 'll marri warwick 's youngest daughter . 
 what though i kill 'd her husband and her father ? 
 the readiest way to make the wench amend 
 is to becom her husband and her father ; 
 the which will i-not all so much for love 
 as for anoth secret close intent 
 by marri her which i must reach unto . 
 but yet i run befor my hors to market . 
 clarenc still breath ; edward still live and reign ; 
 when they are gone , then must i count my gain . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . anoth street 
 
 enter corps of king henri the sixth , with halberd to guard it ; 
 ladi ann be the mourner , attend by tressel and berkeley 
 
 ann . set down , set down your honour load- 
 if honour may be shroud in a hears ; 
 whilst i awhil obsequi lament 
 th ' untim fall of virtuou lancast . 
 poor key-cold figur of a holi king ! 
 pale ash of the hous of lancast ! 
 thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood ! 
 be it law that i invoc thi ghost 
 to hear the lament of poor ann , 
 wife to thi edward , to thi slaughter son , 
 stabb 'd by the self-sam hand that made these wound . 
 lo , in these window that let forth thi life 
 i pour the helpless balm of my poor eye . 
 o , curs be the hand that made these hole ! 
 curs the heart that had the heart to do it ! 
 curs the blood that let thi blood from henc ! 
 more dire hap betid that hate wretch 
 that make us wretch by the death of thee 
 than i can wish to adder , spider , toad , 
 or ani creep venom 'd thing that live ! 
 if ever he have child , abort be it , 
 prodigi , and untim brought to light , 
 whose ugli and unnatur aspect 
 may fright the hope mother at the view , 
 and that be heir to hi unhappi ! 
 if ever he have wife , let her be made 
 more miser by the death of him 
 than i am made by my young lord and thee ! 
 come , now toward chertsey with your holi load , 
 taken from paul 's to be inter there ; 
 and still as you are weari of thi weight 
 rest you , while i lament king henri 's cors . 
 [ the bearer take up the coffin ] 
 
 enter gloucest 
 
 gloucest . stay , you that bear the cors , and set it down . 
 ann . what black magician conjur up thi fiend 
 to stop devot charit deed ? 
 gloucest . villain , set down the cors ; or , by saint paul , 
 i 'll make a cors of him that disobey ! 
 first gentleman . my lord , stand back , and let the coffin 
 pass . 
 gloucest . unmannerd dog ! stand thou , when i command . 
 advanc thi halberd higher than my breast , 
 or , by saint paul , i 'll strike thee to my foot 
 and spurn upon thee , beggar , for thi bold . 
 [ the bearer set down the coffin ] 
 ann . what , do you trembl ? are you all afraid ? 
 ala , i blame you not , for you are mortal , 
 and mortal eye can not endur the devil . 
 avaunt , thou dread minist of hell ! 
 thou hadst but power over hi mortal bodi , 
 hi soul thou canst not have ; therefor , be gone . 
 gloucest . sweet saint , for chariti , be not so curst . 
 ann . foul devil , for god 's sake , henc and troubl us not ; 
 for thou hast made the happi earth thi hell 
 fill 'd it with curs cri and deep exclaim . 
 if thou delight to view thi heinou deed , 
 behold thi pattern of thi butcheri . 
 o , gentlemen , see , see ! dead henri 's wound 
 open their congeal 'd mouth and bleed afresh . 
 blush , blush , thou lump of foul deform , 
 for 't is thi presenc that exhal thi blood 
 from cold and empti vein where no blood dwell ; 
 thi deed inhuman and unnatur 
 provok thi delug most unnatur . 
 o god , which thi blood mad'st , reveng hi death ! 
 o earth , which thi blood drink'st , reveng hi death ! 
 either , heav'n , with lightn strike the murd'rer dead ; 
 or , earth , gape open wide and eat him quick , 
 as thou dost swallow up thi good king 's blood , 
 which hi hell-govern 'd arm hath butcher . 
 gloucest . ladi , you know no rule of chariti , 
 which render good for bad , bless for curs . 
 ann . villain , thou knowest nor law of god nor man : 
 no beast so fierc but know some touch of piti . 
 gloucest . but i know none , and therefor am no beast . 
 ann . o wonder , when devil tell the truth ! 
 gloucest . more wonder when angel are so angri . 
 vouchsaf , divin perfect of a woman , 
 of these suppos crime to give me leav 
 by circumst but to acquit myself . 
 ann . vouchsaf , diffu 'd infect of a man , 
 of these known evil but to give me leav 
 by circumst to accus thi curs self . 
 gloucest . fairer than tongu can name thee , let me have 
 some patient leisur to excus myself . 
 ann . fouler than heart can think thee , thou canst make 
 no excus current but to hang thyself . 
 gloucest . by such despair i should accus myself . 
 ann . and by despair shalt thou stand excus 
 for do worthi vengeanc on thyself 
 that didst unworthi slaughter upon other . 
 gloucest . say that i slew them not ? 
 ann . then say they were not slain . 
 but dead they are , and , devilish slave , by thee . 
 gloucest . i did not kill your husband . 
 ann . whi , then he is aliv . 
 gloucest . nay , he is dead , and slain by edward 's hand . 
 ann . in thi foul throat thou liest : queen margaret saw 
 thi murd'rou falchion smoke in hi blood ; 
 the which thou onc didst bend against her breast , 
 but that thi brother beat asid the point . 
 gloucest . i wa provok by her sland'rou tongu 
 that laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulder . 
 ann . thou wast provok by thi bloodi mind , 
 that never dream'st on aught but butcheri . 
 didst thou not kill thi king ? 
 gloucest . i grant ye . 
 ann . dost grant me , hedgehog ? then , god grant me to 
 thou mayst be damn for that wick deed ! 
 o , he wa gentl , mild , and virtuou ! 
 gloucest . the better for the king of heaven , that hath 
 him . 
 ann . he is in heaven , where thou shalt never come . 
 gloucest . let him thank me that holp to send him 
 thither , 
 for he wa fitter for that place than earth . 
 ann . and thou unfit for ani place but hell . 
 gloucest . ye , one place els , if you will hear me name it . 
 ann . some dungeon . 
 gloucest . your bed-chamb . 
 ann . ill rest betid the chamber where thou liest ! 
 gloucest . so will it , madam , till i lie with you . 
 ann . i hope so . 
 gloucest . i know so . but , gentl ladi ann , 
 to leav thi keen encount of our wit , 
 and fall someth into a slower method- 
 is not the causer of the timeless death 
 of these plantagenet , henri and edward , 
 as blame as the execution ? 
 ann . thou wast the caus and most accur 'd effect . 
 gloucest . your beauti wa the caus of that effect- 
 your beauti that did haunt me in my sleep 
 to undertak the death of all the world 
 so i might live one hour in your sweet bosom . 
 ann . if i thought that , i tell thee , homicid , 
 these nail should rend that beauti from my cheek . 
 gloucest . these eye could not endur that beauti 's 
 wreck ; 
 you should not blemish it if i stood by . 
 as all the world is cheer by the sun , 
 so i by that ; it is my day , my life . 
 ann . black night o'ershad thi day , and death thi life ! 
 gloucest . curs not thyself , fair creatur ; thou art both . 
 ann . i would i were , to be reveng 'd on thee . 
 gloucest . it is a quarrel most unnatur , 
 to be reveng 'd on him that loveth thee . 
 ann . it is a quarrel just and reason , 
 to be reveng 'd on him that kill 'd my husband . 
 gloucest . he that bereft thee , ladi , of thi husband 
 did it to help thee to a better husband . 
 ann . hi better doth not breath upon the earth . 
 gloucest . he live that love thee better than he could . 
 ann . name him . 
 gloucest . plantagenet . 
 ann . whi , that wa he . 
 gloucest . the self-sam name , but one of better natur . 
 ann . where is he ? 
 gloucest . here . [ she spit at him ] whi dost thou spit 
 at me ? 
 ann . would it were mortal poison , for thi sake ! 
 gloucest . never came poison from so sweet a place . 
 ann . never hung poison on a fouler toad . 
 out of my sight ! thou dost infect mine eye . 
 gloucest . thine eye , sweet ladi , have infect mine . 
 ann . would they were basilisk to strike thee dead ! 
 gloucest . i would they were , that i might die at onc ; 
 for now they kill me with a live death . 
 those eye of thine from mine have drawn salt tear , 
 sham 'd their aspect with store of childish drops- 
 these eye , which never shed remors tear , 
 no , when my father york and edward wept 
 to hear the piteou moan that rutland made 
 when black-fac 'd clifford shook hi sword at him ; 
 nor when thi warlik father , like a child , 
 told the sad stori of my father 's death , 
 and twenti time made paus to sob and weep 
 that all the standers-bi had wet their cheek 
 like tree bedash 'd with rain-in that sad time 
 my manli eye did scorn an humbl tear ; 
 and what these sorrow could not thenc exhal 
 thi beauti hath , and made them blind with weep . 
 i never su to friend nor enemi ; 
 my tongu could never learn sweet smooth word ; 
 but , now thi beauti is propo 'd my fee , 
 my proud heart sue , and prompt my tongu to speak . 
 [ she look scorn at him ] 
 teach not thi lip such scorn ; for it wa made 
 for kiss , ladi , not for such contempt . 
 if thi reveng heart can not forgiv , 
 lo here i lend thee thi sharp-point sword ; 
 which if thou pleas to hide in thi true breast 
 and let the soul forth that adoreth thee , 
 i lay it nake to the deadli stroke , 
 and humbl beg the death upon my knee . 
 [ he lay hi breast open ; she offer at it with hi sword ] 
 nay , do not paus ; for i did kill king henry- 
 but 't wa thi beauti that provok me . 
 nay , now dispatch ; 't wa i that stabb 'd young edward- 
 but 't wa thi heavenli face that set me on . 
 [ she fall the sword ] 
 take up the sword again , or take up me . 
 ann . aris , dissembl ; though i wish thi death , 
 i will not be thi execution . 
 gloucest . then bid me kill myself , and i will do it ; 
 ann . i have alreadi . 
 gloucest . that wa in thi rage . 
 speak it again , and even with the word 
 thi hand , which for thi love did kill thi love , 
 shall for thi love kill a far truer love ; 
 to both their death shalt thou be accessari . 
 ann . i would i knew thi heart . 
 gloucest . 't is figur 'd in my tongu . 
 ann . i fear me both are fals . 
 gloucest . then never wa man true . 
 ann . well put up your sword . 
 gloucest . say , then , my peac is made . 
 ann . that shalt thou know hereaft . 
 gloucest . but shall i live in hope ? 
 ann . all men , i hope , live so . 
 gloucest . vouchsaf to wear thi ring . 
 ann . to take is not to give . [ put on the ring ] 
 gloucest . look how my ring encompasseth thi finger , 
 even so thi breast encloseth my poor heart ; 
 wear both of them , for both of them are thine . 
 and if thi poor devot servant may 
 but beg one favour at thi graciou hand , 
 thou dost confirm hi happi for ever . 
 ann . what is it ? 
 gloucest . that it may pleas you leav these sad design 
 to him that hath most caus to be a mourner , 
 and present repair to crosbi hous ; 
 where-aft i have solemnli interr 'd 
 at chertsey monast'ri thi nobl king , 
 and wet hi grave with my repent tears- 
 i will with all expedi duti see you . 
 for diver unknown reason , i beseech you , 
 grant me thi boon . 
 ann . with all my heart ; and much it joy me too 
 to see you are becom so penit . 
 tressel and berkeley , go along with me . 
 gloucest . bid me farewel . 
 ann . 't is more than you deserv ; 
 but sinc you teach me how to flatter you , 
 imagin i have said farewel alreadi . 
 exeunt two gentlemen with ladi ann 
 gloucest . sir , take up the cors . 
 gentlemen . toward chertsey , nobl lord ? 
 gloucest . no , to white friar ; there attend my come . 
 exeunt all but gloucest 
 wa ever woman in thi humour woo 'd ? 
 wa ever woman in thi humour won ? 
 i 'll have her ; but i will not keep her long . 
 what ! i that kill 'd her husband and hi father- 
 to take her in her heart 's extremest hate , 
 with curs in her mouth , tear in her eye , 
 the bleed wit of my hatr by ; 
 have god , her conscienc , and these bar against me , 
 and i no friend to back my suit at all 
 but the plain devil and dissembl look , 
 and yet to win her , all the world to noth ! 
 ha ! 
 hath she forgot alreadi that brave princ , 
 edward , her lord , whom i , some three month sinc , 
 stabb 'd in my angri mood at tewksburi ? 
 a sweeter and a loveli gentleman- 
 fram 'd in the prodig of natur , 
 young , valiant , wise , and no doubt right royal- 
 the spaciou world can not again afford ; 
 and will she yet abas her eye on me , 
 that cropp 'd the golden prime of thi sweet princ 
 and made her widow to a woeful bed ? 
 on me , whose all not equal edward 's moieti ? 
 on me , that halt and am misshapen thu ? 
 my dukedom to a beggarli denier , 
 i do mistak my person all thi while . 
 upon my life , she find , although i can not , 
 myself to be a marv'llou proper man . 
 i 'll be at charg for a looking-glass , 
 and entertain a score or two of tailor 
 to studi fashion to adorn my bodi . 
 sinc i am crept in favour with myself , 
 i will maintain it with some littl cost . 
 but first i 'll turn yon fellow in hi grave , 
 and then return lament to my love . 
 shine out , fair sun , till i have bought a glass , 
 that i may see my shadow as i pass . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter queen elizabeth , lord river , and lord grey 
 
 river . have patienc , madam ; there 's no doubt hi majesti 
 will soon recov hi accustom 'd health . 
 grey . in that you brook it ill , it make him wors ; 
 therefor , for god 's sake , entertain good comfort , 
 and cheer hi grace with quick and merri eye . 
 queen elizabeth . if he were dead , what would betid on 
 me ? 
 grey . no other harm but loss of such a lord . 
 queen elizabeth . the loss of such a lord includ all 
 harm . 
 grey . the heaven have bless 'd you with a goodli son 
 to be your comfort when he is gone . 
 queen elizabeth . ah , he is young ; and hi minor 
 is put unto the trust of richard gloucest , 
 a man that love not me , nor none of you . 
 river . is it conclud he shall be protector ? 
 queen elizabeth . it is determin 'd , not conclud yet ; 
 but so it must be , if the king miscarri . 
 
 enter buckingham and derbi 
 
 grey . here come the lord of buckingham and derbi . 
 buckingham . good time of day unto your royal grace ! 
 derbi . god make your majesti joy as you have been . 
 queen elizabeth . the countess richmond , good my lord 
 of derbi , 
 to your good prayer will scarc say amen . 
 yet , derbi , notwithstand she 's your wife 
 and love not me , be you , good lord , assur 'd 
 i hate not you for her proud arrog . 
 derbi . i do beseech you , either not believ 
 the enviou slander of her fals accus ; 
 or , if she be accu 'd on true report , 
 bear with her weak , which i think proce 
 from wayward sick and no ground malic . 
 queen elizabeth . saw you the king to-day , my lord of 
 derbi ? 
 derbi . but now the duke of buckingham and i 
 are come from visit hi majesti . 
 queen elizabeth . what likelihood of hi amend , 
 lord ? 
 buckingham . madam , good hope ; hi grace speak 
 cheer . 
 queen elizabeth . god grant him health ! did you confer 
 with him ? 
 buckingham . ay , madam ; he desir to make aton 
 between the duke of gloucest and your brother , 
 and between them and my lord chamberlain ; 
 and sent to warn them to hi royal presenc . 
 queen elizabeth . would all were well ! but that will 
 never be . 
 i fear our happi is at the height . 
 
 enter gloucest , hast , and dorset 
 
 gloucest . they do me wrong , and i will not endur it . 
 who is it that complain unto the king 
 that i , forsooth , am stern and love them not ? 
 by holi paul , they love hi grace but lightli 
 that fill hi ear with such dissenti rumour . 
 becaus i can not flatter and look fair , 
 smile in men 's face , smooth , deceiv , and cog , 
 duck with french nod and apish courtesi , 
 i must be held a rancor enemi . 
 can not a plain man live and think no harm 
 but thu hi simpl truth must be abu 'd 
 with silken , sli , insinu jack ? 
 grey . to who in all thi presenc speak your grace ? 
 gloucest . to thee , that hast nor honesti nor grace . 
 when have i injur 'd thee ? when done thee wrong , 
 or thee , or thee , or ani of your faction ? 
 a plagu upon you all ! hi royal grace- 
 whom god preserv better than you would wish ! - 
 can not be quiet searc a breath while 
 but you must troubl him with lewd complaint . 
 queen elizabeth . brother of gloucest , you mistak the 
 matter . 
 the king , on hi own royal disposit 
 and not provok 'd by ani suitor else- 
 aim , belik , at your interior hatr 
 that in your outward action show itself 
 against my children , brother , and myself- 
 make him to send that he may learn the ground . 
 gloucest . i can not tell ; the world is grown so bad 
 that wren make prey where eagl dare not perch . 
 sinc everi jack becam a gentleman , 
 there 's mani a gentl person made a jack . 
 queen elizabeth . come , come , we know your mean , 
 brother gloucest : 
 you envi my advanc and my friend ' ; 
 god grant we never may have need of you ! 
 gloucest . meantim , god grant that i have need of you . 
 our brother is imprison 'd by your mean , 
 myself disgrac 'd , and the nobil 
 held in contempt ; while great promot 
 are daili given to ennobl those 
 that scarc some two day sinc were worth a nobl . 
 queen elizabeth . by him that rai 'd me to thi care 
 height 
 from that content hap which i enjoy 'd , 
 i never did incens hi majesti 
 against the duke of clarenc , but have been 
 an earnest advoc to plead for him . 
 my lord , you do me shame injuri 
 fals to draw me in these vile suspect . 
 gloucest . you may deni that you were not the mean 
 of my lord hast ' late imprison . 
 river . she may , my lord ; for- 
 gloucest . she may , lord river ? whi , who know 
 not so ? 
 she may do more , sir , than deni that : 
 she may help you to mani fair prefer 
 and then deni her aid hand therein , 
 and lay those honour on your high desert . 
 what may she not ? she may-ay , marri , may she- 
 river . what , marri , may she ? 
 gloucest . what , marri , may she ? marri with a king , 
 a bachelor , and a handsom stripl too . 
 iwi your grandam had a worser match . 
 queen elizabeth . my lord of gloucest , i have too long 
 born 
 your blunt upbraid and your bitter scoff . 
 by heaven , i will acquaint hi majesti 
 of those gross taunt that oft i have endur 'd . 
 i had rather be a countri servant-maid 
 than a great queen with thi condition- 
 to be so bait , scorn 'd , and storm at . 
 
 enter old queen margaret , behind 
 
 small joy have i in be england 's queen . 
 queen margaret . and less'n be that small , god , i 
 beseech him ! 
 thi honour , state , and seat , is due to me . 
 gloucest . what ! threat you me with tell of the 
 king ? 
 tell him and spare not . look what i have said 
 i will avouch't in presenc of the king . 
 i dare adventur to be sent to th ' tow ' r . 
 't is time to speak-mi pain are quit forgot . 
 queen margaret . out , devil ! i do rememb them to 
 well : 
 thou kill'dst my husband henri in the tower , 
 and edward , my poor son , at tewksburi . 
 gloucest . ere you were queen , ay , or your husband 
 king , 
 i wa a pack-hors in hi great affair , 
 a weeder-out of hi proud adversari , 
 a liber reward of hi friend ; 
 to royal hi blood i spent mine own . 
 queen margaret . ay , and much better blood than hi or 
 thine . 
 gloucest . in all which time you and your husband grey 
 were factiou for the hous of lancast ; 
 and , river , so were you . wa not your husband 
 in margaret 's battl at saint alban slain ? 
 let me put in your mind , if you forget , 
 what you have been ere thi , and what you are ; 
 withal , what i have been , and what i am . 
 queen margaret . a murd'rou villain , and so still thou art . 
 gloucest . poor clarenc did forsak hi father , warwick , 
 ay , and forswor himself-which jesu pardon ! - 
 queen margaret . which god reveng ! 
 gloucest . to fight on edward 's parti for the crown ; 
 and for hi meed , poor lord , he is mew up . 
 i would to god my heart were flint like edward 's , 
 or edward 's soft and piti like mine . 
 i am too childish-foolish for thi world . 
 queen margaret . hie thee to hell for shame and leav thi 
 world , 
 thou cacodemon ; there thi kingdom is . 
 river . my lord of gloucest , in those busi day 
 which here you urg to prove us enemi , 
 we follow 'd then our lord , our sovereign king . 
 so should we you , if you should be our king . 
 gloucest . if i should be ! i had rather be a pedlar . 
 far be it from my heart , the thought thereof ! 
 queen elizabeth . as littl joy , my lord , as you suppos 
 you should enjoy were you thi countri 's king , 
 as littl joy you may suppos in me 
 that i enjoy , be the queen thereof . 
 queen margaret . as littl joy enjoy the queen thereof ; 
 for i am she , and altogeth joyless . 
 i can no longer hold me patient . [ advanc ] 
 hear me , you wrangl pirat , that fall out 
 in share that which you have pill 'd from me . 
 which of you trembl not that look on me ? 
 if not that , i am queen , you bow like subject , 
 yet that , by you depo 'd , you quak like rebel ? 
 ah , gentl villain , do not turn away ! 
 gloucest . foul wrinkl witch , what mak'st thou in my 
 sight ? 
 queen margaret . but repetit of what thou hast marr 'd , 
 that will i make befor i let thee go . 
 gloucest . wert thou not banish on pain of death ? 
 queen margaret . i wa ; but i do find more pain in 
 banish 
 than death can yield me here by my abod . 
 a husband and a son thou ow'st to me ; 
 and thou a kingdom ; all of you allegi . 
 thi sorrow that i have by right is your ; 
 and all the pleasur you usurp are mine . 
 gloucest . the curs my nobl father laid on thee , 
 when thou didst crown hi warlik brow with paper 
 and with thi scorn drew'st river from hi eye , 
 and then to dri them gav'st the duke a clout 
 steep 'd in the faultless blood of pretti rutland- 
 hi curs then from bitter of soul 
 denounc 'd against thee are all fall'n upon thee ; 
 and god , not we , hath plagu 'd thi bloodi deed . 
 queen elizabeth . so just is god to right the innoc . 
 hast . o , 't wa the foulest deed to slay that babe , 
 and the most merciless that e'er wa heard of ! 
 river . tyrant themselv wept when it wa report . 
 dorset . no man but prophesi reveng for it . 
 buckingham . northumberland , then present , wept to see it . 
 queen margaret . what , were you snarl all befor i came , 
 readi to catch each other by the throat , 
 and turn you all your hatr now on me ? 
 did york 's dread curs prevail so much with heaven 
 that henri 's death , my love edward 's death , 
 their kingdom 's loss , my woeful banish , 
 should all but answer for that peevish brat ? 
 can curs pierc the cloud and enter heaven ? 
 whi then , give way , dull cloud , to my quick curs ! 
 though not by war , by surfeit die your king , 
 as our by murder , to make him a king ! 
 edward thi son , that now is princ of wale , 
 for edward our son , that wa princ of wale , 
 die in hi youth by like untim violenc ! 
 thyself a queen , for me that wa a queen , 
 outliv thi glori , like my wretch self ! 
 long mayest thou live to wail thi children 's death , 
 and see anoth , as i see thee now , 
 deck 'd in thi right , as thou art stall 'd in mine ! 
 long die thi happi day befor thi death ; 
 and , after mani length'n hour of grief , 
 die neither mother , wife , nor england 's queen ! 
 river and dorset , you were stander by , 
 and so wast thou , lord hast , when my son 
 wa stabb 'd with bloodi dagger . god , i pray him , 
 that none of you may live hi natur age , 
 but by some unlook 'd accid cut off ! 
 gloucest . have done thi charm , thou hate wither 'd 
 hag . 
 queen margaret . and leav out thee ? stay , dog , for thou 
 shalt hear me . 
 if heaven have ani grievou plagu in store 
 exceed those that i can wish upon thee , 
 o , let them keep it till thi sin be ripe , 
 and then hurl down their indign 
 on thee , the troubler of the poor world 's peac ! 
 the worm of conscienc still be-gnaw thi soul ! 
 thi friend suspect for traitor while thou liv'st , 
 and take deep traitor for thi dearest friend ! 
 no sleep close up that deadli eye of thine , 
 unless it be while some torment dream 
 affright thee with a hell of ugli devil ! 
 thou elvish-mark 'd , abort , root hog , 
 thou that wast seal 'd in thi nativ 
 the slave of natur and the son of hell , 
 thou slander of thi heavi mother 's womb , 
 thou loath issu of thi father 's loin , 
 thou rag of honour , thou detested- 
 gloucest . margaret ! 
 queen margaret . richard ! 
 gloucest . ha ? 
 queen margaret . i call thee not . 
 gloucest . i cri thee merci then , for i did think 
 that thou hadst call 'd me all these bitter name . 
 queen margaret . whi , so i did , but look 'd for no repli . 
 o , let me make the period to my curs ! 
 gloucest . 't is done by me , and end in-margaret . 
 queen elizabeth . thu have you breath 'd your curs 
 against yourself . 
 queen margaret . poor paint queen , vain flourish of my 
 fortun ! 
 whi strew'st thou sugar on that bottl spider 
 whose deadli web ensnareth thee about ? 
 fool , fool ! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself . 
 the day will come that thou shalt wish for me 
 to help thee curs thi poison bunch-back 'd toad . 
 hast . false-bod woman , end thi frantic curs , 
 lest to thi harm thou move our patienc . 
 queen margaret . foul shame upon you ! you have all 
 mov 'd mine . 
 river . were you well serv 'd , you would be taught your 
 duti . 
 queen margaret . to serv me well you all should do me 
 duti , 
 teach me to be your queen and you my subject . 
 o , serv me well , and teach yourselv that duti ! 
 dorset . disput not with her ; she is lunat . 
 queen margaret . peac , master marqui , you are malapert ; 
 your fire-new stamp of honour is scarc current . 
 o , that your young nobil could judg 
 what 'twere to lose it and be miser ! 
 they that stand high have mani blast to shake them , 
 and if they fall they dash themselv to piec . 
 gloucest . good counsel , marri ; learn it , learn it , marqui . 
 dorset . it touch you , my lord , as much as me . 
 gloucest . ay , and much more ; but i wa born so high , 
 our aeri buildeth in the cedar 's top , 
 and dalli with the wind , and scorn the sun . 
 queen margaret . and turn the sun to shade-ala ! ala ! 
 wit my son , now in the shade of death , 
 whose bright out-shin beam thi cloudi wrath 
 hath in etern dark fold up . 
 your aeri buildeth in our aeri 's nest . 
 o god that seest it , do not suffer it ; 
 as it is won with blood , lost be it so ! 
 buckingham . peac , peac , for shame , if not for chariti ! 
 queen margaret . urg neither chariti nor shame to me . 
 uncharit with me have you dealt , 
 and shame my hope by you are butcher 'd . 
 my chariti is outrag , life my shame ; 
 and in that shame still live my sorrow 's rage ! 
 buckingham . have done , have done . 
 queen margaret . o princ buckingham , i 'll kiss thi 
 hand 
 in sign of leagu and amiti with thee . 
 now fair befal thee and thi nobl hous ! 
 thi garment are not spot with our blood , 
 nor thou within the compass of my curs . 
 buckingham . nor no one here ; for curs never pass 
 the lip of those that breath them in the air . 
 queen margaret . i will not think but they ascend the sky 
 and there awak god 's gentle-sleep peac . 
 o buckingham , take heed of yonder dog ! 
 look when he fawn , he bite ; and when he bite , 
 hi venom tooth will rankl to the death : 
 have not to do with him , bewar of him ; 
 sin , death , and hell , have set their mark on him , 
 and all their minist attend on him . 
 gloucest . what doth she say , my lord of buckingham ? 
 buckingham . noth that i respect , my graciou lord . 
 queen margaret . what , dost thou scorn me for my gentl 
 counsel , 
 and sooth the devil that i warn thee from ? 
 o , but rememb thi anoth day , 
 when he shall split thi veri heart with sorrow , 
 and say poor margaret wa a prophetess ! 
 live each of you the subject to hi hate , 
 and he to your , and all of you to god 's ! exit 
 buckingham . my hair doth stand an end to hear her curs . 
 river . and so doth mine . i muse whi she 's at liberti . 
 gloucest . i can not blame her ; by god 's holi mother , 
 she hath had too much wrong ; and i repent 
 my part thereof that i have done to her . 
 queen elizabeth . i never did her ani to my knowledg . 
 gloucest . yet you have all the vantag of her wrong . 
 i wa too hot to do somebodi good 
 that is too cold in think of it now . 
 marri , as for clarenc , he is well repaid ; 
 he is frank 'd up to fat for hi pain ; 
 god pardon them that are the caus thereof ! 
 river . a virtuou and a christian-lik conclus , 
 to pray for them that have done scath to us ! 
 gloucest . so do i ever- [ asid ] be well advi 'd ; 
 for had i cur 'd now , i had cur 'd myself . 
 
 enter catesbi 
 
 catesbi . madam , hi majesti doth can for you , 
 and for your grace , and you , my graciou lord . 
 queen elizabeth . catesbi , i come . lord , will you go 
 with me ? 
 river . we wait upon your grace . 
 exeunt all but gloucest 
 gloucest . i do the wrong , and first begin to brawl . 
 the secret mischief that i set abroach 
 i lay unto the grievou charg of other . 
 clarenc , who i inde have cast in dark , 
 i do beweep to mani simpl gull ; 
 name , to derbi , hast , buckingham ; 
 and tell them 't is the queen and her alli 
 that stir the king against the duke my brother . 
 now they believ it , and withal whet me 
 to be reveng 'd on river , dorset , grey ; 
 but then i sigh and , with a piec of scriptur , 
 tell them that god bid us do good for evil . 
 and thu i cloth my nake villaini 
 with odd old end stol'n forth of holi writ , 
 and seem a saint when most i play the devil . 
 
 enter two murder 
 
 but , soft , here come my execution . 
 how now , my hardi stout resolv mate ! 
 are you now go to dispatch thi thing ? 
 first murder . we are , my lord , and come to have the 
 warrant , 
 that we may be admit where he is . 
 gloucest . well thought upon ; i have it here about me . 
 [ give the warrant ] 
 when you have done , repair to crosbi place . 
 but , sir , be sudden in the execut , 
 withal obdur , do not hear him plead ; 
 for clarenc is well-spoken , and perhap 
 may move your heart to piti , if you mark him . 
 first murder . tut , tut , my lord , we will not stand to 
 prate ; 
 talker are no good doer . be assur 'd 
 we go to use our hand and not our tongu . 
 gloucest . your eye drop millston when fool ' eye fall 
 tear . 
 i like you , lad ; about your busi straight ; 
 go , go , dispatch . 
 first murder . we will , my nobl lord . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the tower 
 
 enter clarenc and keeper 
 
 keeper . whi look your grace so heavili to-day ? 
 clarenc . o , i have pass 'd a miser night , 
 so full of fear dream , of ugli sight , 
 that , as i am a christian faith man , 
 i would not spend anoth such a night 
 though 'twere to buy a world of happi days- 
 so full of dismal terror wa the time ! 
 keeper . what wa your dream , my lord ? i pray you 
 tell me . 
 clarenc . methought that i had broken from the tower 
 and wa embark 'd to cross to burgundi ; 
 and in my compani my brother gloucest , 
 who from my cabin tempt me to walk 
 upon the hatch . thenc we look 'd toward england , 
 and cite up a thousand heavi time , 
 dure the war of york and lancast , 
 that had befall'n us . as we pac 'd along 
 upon the giddi foot of the hatch , 
 methought that gloucest stumbl , and in fall 
 struck me , that thought to stay him , overboard 
 into the tumbl billow of the main . 
 o lord , methought what pain it wa to drown , 
 what dread nois of water in my ear , 
 what sight of ugli death within my eye ! 
 methought i saw a thousand fear wreck , 
 a thousand men that fish gnaw 'd upon , 
 wedg of gold , great anchor , heap of pearl , 
 inestim stone , unvalu jewel , 
 all scatt'r in the bottom of the sea ; 
 some lay in dead men 's skull , and in the hole 
 where eye did onc inhabit there were crept , 
 as 'twere in scorn of eye , reflect gem , 
 that woo 'd the slimi bottom of the deep 
 and mock 'd the dead bone that lay scatt'r by . 
 keeper . had you such leisur in the time of death 
 to gaze upon these secret of the deep ? 
 clarenc . methought i had ; and often did i strive 
 to yield the ghost , but still the enviou flood 
 stopp 'd in my soul and would not let it forth 
 to find the empti , vast , and wand'r air ; 
 but smother 'd it within my pant bulk , 
 who almost burst to belch it in the sea . 
 keeper . awak 'd you not in thi sore agoni ? 
 clarenc . no , no , my dream wa lengthen 'd after life . 
 o , then began the tempest to my soul ! 
 i pass 'd , methought , the melancholi flood 
 with that sour ferryman which poet write of , 
 unto the kingdom of perpetu night . 
 the first that there did greet my stranger soul 
 wa my great father-in-law , renown warwick , 
 who spake aloud 'what scourg for perjuri 
 can thi dark monarchi afford fals clarenc ? ' 
 and so he vanish 'd . then came wand'r by 
 a shadow like an angel , with bright hair 
 dabbl in blood , and he shriek 'd out aloud 
 'clarenc is come-fals , fleet , perjur 'd clarenc , 
 that stabb 'd me in the field by tewksburi . 
 seiz on him , furi , take him unto torment ! ' 
 with that , methought , a legion of foul fiend 
 environ 'd me , and howl in mine ear 
 such hideou cri that , with the veri nois , 
 i trembl wak 'd , and for a season after 
 could not believ but that i wa in hell , 
 such terribl impress made my dream . 
 keeper . no marvel , lord , though it affright you ; 
 i am afraid , methink , to hear you tell it . 
 clarenc . ah , keeper , keeper , i have done these thing 
 that now give evid against my soul 
 for edward 's sake , and see how he requit me ! 
 o god ! if my deep prayer can not appeas thee , 
 but thou wilt be aveng 'd on my misde , 
 yet execut thi wrath in me alon ; 
 o , spare my guiltless wife and my poor children ! 
 keeper , i prithe sit by me awhil ; 
 my soul is heavi , and i fain would sleep . 
 keeper . i will , my lord . god give your grace good rest . 
 [ clarenc sleep ] 
 
 enter brakenburi the lieuten 
 
 brakenburi . sorrow break season and repos hour , 
 make the night morn and the noontid night . 
 princ have but their titl for their glori , 
 an outward honour for an inward toil ; 
 and for unfelt imagin 
 they often feel a world of restless care , 
 so that between their tide and low name 
 there 's noth differ but the outward fame . 
 
 enter the two murder 
 
 first murder . ho ! who 's here ? 
 brakenburi . what wouldst thou , fellow , and how cam'st 
 thou hither ? 
 first murder . i would speak with clarenc , and i came 
 hither on my leg . 
 brakenburi . what , so brief ? 
 second murder . 't is better , sir , than to be tediou . let 
 him see our commiss and talk no more . 
 [ brakenburi read it ] 
 brakenburi . i am , in thi , command to deliv 
 the nobl duke of clarenc to your hand . 
 i will not reason what is meant herebi , 
 becaus i will be guiltless from the mean . 
 there lie the duke asleep ; and there the key . 
 i 'll to the king and signifi to him 
 that thu i have resign 'd to you my charg . 
 first murder . you may , sir ; 't is a point of wisdom . fare 
 you well . exeunt brakenburi and keeper 
 second murder . what , shall i stab him as he sleep ? 
 first murder . no ; he 'll say 't wa done cowardli , when 
 he wake . 
 second murder . whi , he shall never wake until the great 
 judgment-day . 
 first murder . whi , then he 'll say we stabb 'd him 
 sleep . 
 second murder . the urg of that word judgment hath 
 bred a kind of remors in me . 
 first murder . what , art thou afraid ? 
 second murder . not to kill him , have a warrant ; but to 
 be damn 'd for kill him , from the which no warrant can 
 defend me . 
 first murder . i thought thou hadst been resolut . 
 second murder . so i am , to let him live . 
 first murder . i 'll back to the duke of gloucest and 
 tell him so . 
 second murder . nay , i prithe , stay a littl . i hope thi 
 passion humour of mine will chang ; it wa wont to 
 hold me but while one tell twenti . 
 first murder . how dost thou feel thyself now ? 
 second murder . faith , some certain dreg of conscienc 
 are yet within me . 
 first murder . rememb our reward , when the deed 's 
 done . 
 second murder . zound , he die ; i had forgot the reward . 
 first murder . where 's thi conscienc now ? 
 second murder . o , in the duke of gloucest 's purs ! 
 first murder . when he open hi purs to give us our 
 reward , thi conscienc fli out . 
 second murder . 't is no matter ; let it go ; there 's few or 
 none will entertain it . 
 first murder . what if it come to thee again ? 
 second murder . i 'll not meddl with it-it make a man 
 coward : a man can not steal , but it accuseth him ; a man 
 can not swear , but it check him ; a man can not lie with hi 
 neighbour 's wife , but it detect him . 't is a blush shame- 
 fac 'd spirit that mutini in a man 's bosom ; it fill a man 
 full of obstacl : it made me onc restor a purs of gold 
 that-bi chanc i found . it beggar ani man that keep it . 
 it is turn 'd out of town and citi for a danger thing ; 
 and everi man that mean to live well endeavour to trust 
 to himself and live without it . 
 first murder . zound , 't is even now at my elbow , 
 persuad me not to kill the duke . 
 second murder . take the devil in thi mind and believ 
 him not ; he would insinu with thee but to make the 
 sigh . 
 first murder . i am strong-fram 'd ; he can not prevail with 
 me . 
 second murder . spoke like a tall man that respect thi 
 reput . come , shall we fall to work ? 
 first murder . take him on the costard with the hilt of 
 thi sword , and then chop him in the malmsey-butt in the 
 next room . 
 second murder . o excel devic ! and make a sop of 
 him . 
 first murder . soft ! he wake . 
 second murder . strike ! 
 first murder . no , we 'll reason with him . 
 clarenc . where art thou , keeper ? give me a cup of wine . 
 second murder . you shall have wine enough , my lord , 
 anon . 
 clarenc . in god 's name , what art thou ? 
 first murder . a man , as you are . 
 clarenc . but not as i am , royal . 
 second murder . nor you as we are , loyal . 
 clarenc . thi voic is thunder , but thi look are humbl . 
 first murder . my voic is now the king 's , my look 
 mine own . 
 clarenc . how darkli and how deadli dost thou speak ! 
 your eye do menac me . whi look you pale ? 
 who sent you hither ? wherefor do you come ? 
 second murder . to , to , to- 
 clarenc . to murder me ? 
 both murder . ay , ay . 
 clarenc . you scarc have the heart to tell me so , 
 and therefor can not have the heart to do it . 
 wherein , my friend , have i offend you ? 
 first murder . offend us you have not , but the king . 
 clarenc . i shall be reconcil 'd to him again . 
 second murder . never , my lord ; therefor prepar to die . 
 clarenc . are you drawn forth among a world of men 
 to slay the innoc ? what is my offenc ? 
 where is the evid that doth accus me ? 
 what law quest have given their verdict up 
 unto the frown judg , or who pronounc 'd 
 the bitter sentenc of poor clarenc ' death ? 
 befor i be convict by cours of law , 
 to threaten me with death is most unlaw . 
 i charg you , as you hope to have redempt 
 by christ 's dear blood shed for our grievou sin , 
 that you depart and lay no hand on me . 
 the deed you undertak is damnabl . 
 first murder . what we will do , we do upon command . 
 second murder . and he that hath command is our 
 king . 
 clarenc . erron vassal ! the great king of king 
 hath in the tabl of hi law command 
 that thou shalt do no murder . will you then 
 spurn at hi edict and fulfil a man 's ? 
 take heed ; for he hold vengeanc in hi hand 
 to hurl upon their head that break hi law . 
 second murder . and that same vengeanc doth he hurl 
 on thee 
 for fals forswear , and for murder too ; 
 thou didst receiv the sacrament to fight 
 in quarrel of the hous of lancast . 
 first murder . and like a traitor to the name of god 
 didst break that vow ; and with thi treacher blade 
 unripp'dst the bowel of thi sov'reign 's son . 
 second murder . whom thou wast sworn to cherish and 
 defend . 
 first murder . how canst thou urg god 's dread law 
 to us , 
 when thou hast broke it in such dear degre ? 
 clarenc . ala ! for whose sake did i that ill deed ? 
 for edward , for my brother , for hi sake . 
 he send you not to murder me for thi , 
 for in that sin he is as deep as i . 
 if god will be aveng for the deed , 
 o , know you yet he doth it publicli . 
 take not the quarrel from hi pow'r arm ; 
 he need no indirect or lawless cours 
 to cut off those that have offend him . 
 first murder . who made thee then a bloodi minist 
 when gallant-spring brave plantagenet , 
 that princ novic , wa struck dead by thee ? 
 clarenc . my brother 's love , the devil , and my rage . 
 first murder . thi brother 's love , our duti , and thi 
 fault , 
 provok us hither now to slaughter thee . 
 clarenc . if you do love my brother , hate not me ; 
 i am hi brother , and i love him well . 
 if you are hir 'd for meed , go back again , 
 and i will send you to my brother gloucest , 
 who shall reward you better for my life 
 than edward will for tide of my death . 
 second murder . you are deceiv 'd : your brother gloucest 
 hate you . 
 clarenc . o , no , he love me , and he hold me dear . 
 go you to him from me . 
 first murder . ay , so we will . 
 clarenc . tell him when that our princ father york 
 bless 'd hi three son with hi victori arm 
 and charg 'd us from hi soul to love each other , 
 he littl thought of thi divid friendship . 
 bid gloucest think of thi , and he will weep . 
 first murder . ay , millston ; as he lesson 'd us to weep . 
 clarenc . o , do not slander him , for he is kind . 
 first murder . right , as snow in harvest . come , you 
 deceiv yourself : 
 't is he that send us to destroy you here . 
 clarenc . it can not be ; for he bewept my fortun 
 and hugg 'd me in hi arm , and swore with sob 
 that he would labour my deliveri . 
 first murder . whi , so he doth , when he deliv you 
 from thi earth 's thraldom to the joy of heaven . 
 second murder . make peac with god , for you must die , 
 my lord . 
 clarenc . have you that holi feel in your soul 
 to counsel me to make my peac with god , 
 and are you yet to your own soul so blind 
 that you will war with god by murd'r me ? 
 o , sir , consid : they that set you on 
 to do thi deed will hate you for the deed . 
 second murder . what shall we do ? 
 clarenc . relent , and save your soul . 
 first murder . relent ! no , 't is cowardli and womanish . 
 clarenc . not to relent is beastli , savag , devilish . 
 which of you , if you were a princ 's son , 
 be pent from liberti as i am now , 
 if two such murder as yourselv came to you , 
 would not entreat for life ? 
 my friend , i spi some piti in thi look ; 
 o , if thine eye be not a flatter , 
 come thou on my side and entreat for me- 
 as you would beg were you in my distress . 
 a beg princ what beggar piti not ? 
 second murder . look behind you , my lord . 
 first murder . [ stab him ] take that , and that . if all 
 thi will not do , 
 i 'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within . 
 exit with the bodi 
 second murder . a bloodi deed , and desper 
 dispatch 'd ! 
 how fain , like pilat , would i wash my hand 
 of thi most grievou murder ! 
 
 re-ent first murder 
 
 first murderer-how now , what mean'st thou that thou 
 help'st me not ? 
 by heaven , the duke shall know how slack you have 
 been ! 
 second murder . i would he knew that i had sav 'd hi 
 brother ! 
 take thou the fee , and tell him what i say ; 
 for i repent me that the duke is slain . exit 
 first murder . so do not i. go , coward as thou art . 
 well , i 'll go hide the bodi in some hole , 
 till that the duke give order for hi burial ; 
 and when i have my meed , i will away ; 
 for thi will out , and then i must not stay . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 flourish . enter king edward sick , queen elizabeth , dorset , river , 
 hast , buckingham , grey , and other 
 
 king edward . whi , so . now have i done a good day 's 
 work . 
 you peer , continu thi unit leagu . 
 i everi day expect an embassag 
 from my redeem to redeem me henc ; 
 and more at peac my soul shall part to heaven , 
 sinc i have made my friend at peac on earth . 
 hast and river , take each other 's hand ; 
 dissembl not your hatr , swear your love . 
 river . by heaven , my soul is purg 'd from grudg hate ; 
 and with my hand i seal my true heart 's love . 
 hast . so thrive i , as i truli swear the like ! 
 king edward . take heed you dalli not befor your king ; 
 lest he that is the suprem king of king 
 confound your hidden falsehood and award 
 either of you to be the other 's end . 
 hast . so prosper i , as i swear perfect love ! 
 river . and i , as i love hast with my heart ! 
 king edward . madam , yourself is not exempt from thi ; 
 nor you , son dorset ; buckingham , nor you : 
 you have been factiou one against the other . 
 wife , love lord hast , let him kiss your hand ; 
 and what you do , do it unfeignedli . 
 queen elizabeth . there , hast ; i will never more 
 rememb 
 our former hatr , so thrive i and mine ! 
 king edward . dorset , embrac him ; hast , love lord 
 marqui . 
 dorset . thi interchang of love , i here protest , 
 upon my part shall be inviol . 
 hast . and so swear i . [ they embrac ] 
 king edward . now , princ buckingham , seal thou thi 
 leagu 
 with thi embrac to my wife 's alli , 
 and make me happi in your uniti . 
 buckingham . [ to the queen ] whenev buckingham 
 doth turn hi hate 
 upon your grace , but with all duteou love 
 doth cherish you and your , god punish me 
 with hate in those where i expect most love ! 
 when i have most need to employ a friend 
 and most assur that he is a friend , 
 deep , hollow , treacher , and full of guil , 
 be he unto me ! thi do i beg of god 
 when i am cold in love to you or your . 
 [ they embrac ] 
 king edward . a pleas cordial , princ buckingham , 
 is thi thi vow unto my sickli heart . 
 there wanteth now our brother gloucest here 
 to make the bless period of thi peac . 
 buckingham . and , in good time , 
 here come sir richard ratcliff and the duke . 
 
 enter gloucest , and ratcliff 
 
 gloucest . good morrow to my sovereign king and 
 queen ; 
 and , princ peer , a happi time of day ! 
 king edward . happi , inde , as we have spent the day . 
 gloucest , we have done deed of chariti , 
 made peac of enmiti , fair love of hate , 
 between these swell wrong-incens peer . 
 gloucest . a bless labour , my most sovereign lord . 
 among thi princ heap , if ani here , 
 by fals intellig or wrong surmis , 
 hold me a foe- 
 if i unwittingli , or in my rage , 
 have aught commit that is hardli born 
 to ani in thi presenc , i desir 
 to reconcil me to hi friendli peac : 
 't is death to me to be at enmiti ; 
 i hate it , and desir all good men 's love . 
 first , madam , i entreat true peac of you , 
 which i will purchas with my duteou servic ; 
 of you , my nobl cousin buckingham , 
 if ever ani grudg were lodg 'd between us ; 
 of you , and you , lord river , and of dorset , 
 that all without desert have frown 'd on me ; 
 of you , lord woodvil , and , lord scale , of you ; 
 duke , earl , lord , gentlemen-inde , of all . 
 i do not know that englishman aliv 
 with whom my soul is ani jot at odd 
 more than the infant that is born to-night . 
 i thank my god for my humil . 
 queen elizabeth . a holi day shall thi be kept hereaft . 
 i would to god all strife were well compound . 
 my sovereign lord , i do beseech your high 
 to take our brother clarenc to your grace . 
 gloucest . whi , madam , have i off'r love for thi , 
 to be so flout in thi royal presenc ? 
 who know not that the gentl duke is dead ? 
 [ they all start ] 
 you do him injuri to scorn hi cors . 
 king edward . who know not he is dead ! who know 
 he is ? 
 queen elizabeth . all-se heaven , what a world is thi ! 
 buckingham . look i so pale , lord dorset , as the rest ? 
 dorset . ay , my good lord ; and no man in the presenc 
 but hi red colour hath forsook hi cheek . 
 king edward . is clarenc dead ? the order wa rever 'd . 
 gloucest . but he , poor man , by your first order die , 
 and that a wing mercuri did bear ; 
 some tardi crippl bare the countermand 
 that came too lag to see him buri . 
 god grant that some , less nobl and less loyal , 
 nearer in bloodi thought , an not in blood , 
 deserv not wors than wretch clarenc did , 
 and yet go current from suspicion ! 
 
 enter derbi 
 
 derbi . a boon , my sovereign , for my servic done ! 
 king edward . i prithe , peac ; my soul is full of sorrow . 
 derbi . i will not rise unless your high hear me . 
 king edward . then say at onc what is it thou request . 
 derbi . the forfeit , sovereign , of my servant 's life ; 
 who slew to-day a riotou gentleman 
 late attend on the duke of norfolk . 
 king edward . have i a tongu to doom my brother 's death , 
 and shall that tongu give pardon to a slave ? 
 my brother kill no man-hi fault wa thought , 
 and yet hi punish wa bitter death . 
 who su to me for him ? who , in my wrath , 
 kneel 'd at my feet , and bid me be advi 'd ? 
 who spoke of brotherhood ? who spoke of love ? 
 who told me how the poor soul did forsak 
 the mighti warwick and did fight for me ? 
 who told me , in the field at tewksburi 
 when oxford had me down , he rescu me 
 and said 'dear brother , live , and be a king ' ? 
 who told me , when we both lay in the field 
 frozen almost to death , how he did lap me 
 even in hi garment , and did give himself , 
 all thin and nake , to the numb cold night ? 
 all thi from my remembr brutish wrath 
 sin pluck 'd , and not a man of you 
 had so much race to put it in my mind . 
 but when your carter or your waiting-vass 
 have done a drunken slaughter and defac 'd 
 the preciou imag of our dear redeem , 
 you straight are on your knee for pardon , pardon ; 
 and i , unjustli too , must grant it you . [ derbi rise ] 
 but for my brother not a man would speak ; 
 nor i , ungraci , speak unto myself 
 for him , poor soul . the proudest of you all 
 have been behold to him in hi life ; 
 yet none of you would onc beg for hi life . 
 o god , i fear thi justic will take hold 
 on me , and you , and mine , and your , for thi ! 
 come , hast , help me to my closet . ah , poor clarenc ! 
 exeunt some with king and queen 
 gloucest . thi is the fruit of rash . mark 'd you not 
 how that the guilti kindr of the queen 
 look 'd pale when they did hear of clarenc ' death ? 
 o , they did urg it still unto the king ! 
 god will reveng it . come , lord , will you go 
 to comfort edward with our compani ? 
 buckingham . we wait upon your grace . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the old duchess of york , with the son and daughter of clarenc 
 
 son . good grandam , tell us , is our father dead ? 
 duchess . no , boy . 
 daughter . whi do you weep so oft , and beat your breast , 
 and cri ' o clarenc , my unhappi son ! ' ? 
 son . whi do you look on us , and shake your head , 
 and call us orphan , wretch , castaway , 
 if that our nobl father were aliv ? 
 duchess . my pretti cousin , you mistak me both ; 
 i do lament the sick of the king , 
 as loath to lose him , not your father 's death ; 
 it were lost sorrow to wail one that 's lost . 
 son . then you conclud , my grandam , he is dead . 
 the king mine uncl is to blame for it . 
 god will reveng it ; whom i will importun 
 with earnest prayer all to that effect . 
 daughter . and so will i . 
 duchess . peac , children , peac ! the king doth love you 
 well . 
 incap and shallow innoc , 
 you can not guess who cau 'd your father 's death . 
 son . grandam , we can ; for my good uncl gloucest 
 told me the king , provok 'd to it by the queen , 
 devi 'd impeach to imprison him . 
 and when my uncl told me so , he wept , 
 and piti me , and kindli kiss 'd my cheek ; 
 bade me reli on him as on my father , 
 and he would love me dearli as a child . 
 duchess . ah , that deceit should steal such gentl shape , 
 and with a virtuou vizor hide deep vice ! 
 he is my son ; ay , and therein my shame ; 
 yet from my dug he drew not thi deceit . 
 son . think you my uncl did dissembl , grandam ? 
 duchess . ay , boy . 
 son . i can not think it . hark ! what nois is thi ? 
 
 enter queen elizabeth , with her hair about her 
 ear ; river and dorset after her 
 
 queen elizabeth . ah , who shall hinder me to wail and 
 weep , 
 to chide my fortun , and torment myself ? 
 i 'll join with black despair against my soul 
 and to myself becom an enemi . 
 duchess . what mean thi scene of rude impati ? 
 queen elizabeth . to make an act of tragic violenc . 
 edward , my lord , thi son , our king , is dead . 
 whi grow the branch when the root is gone ? 
 whi wither not the leav that want their sap ? 
 if you will live , lament ; if die , be brief , 
 that our swift-wing soul may catch the king 's , 
 or like obedi subject follow him 
 to hi new kingdom of ne'er-chang night . 
 duchess . ah , so much interest have i in thi sorrow 
 as i had titl in thi nobl husband ! 
 i have bewept a worthi husband 's death , 
 and liv 'd with look on hi imag ; 
 but now two mirror of hi princ semblanc 
 are crack 'd in piec by malign death , 
 and i for comfort have but one fals glass , 
 that griev me when i see my shame in him . 
 thou art a widow , yet thou art a mother 
 and hast the comfort of thi children left ; 
 but death hath snatch 'd my husband from mine arm 
 and pluck 'd two crutch from my feebl hands- 
 clarenc and edward . o , what caus have i- 
 thine be but a moieti of my moan- 
 to overgo thi woe and drown thi cri ? 
 son . ah , aunt , you wept not for our father 's death ! 
 how can we aid you with our kindr tear ? 
 daughter . our fatherless distress wa left unmoan 'd ; 
 your widow-dolour likewis be unwept ! 
 queen elizabeth . give me no help in lament ; 
 i am not barren to bring forth complaint . 
 all spring reduc their current to mine eye 
 that i , be govern 'd by the wateri moon , 
 may send forth plenteou tear to drown the world ! 
 ah for my husband , for my dear lord edward ! 
 children . ah for our father , for our dear lord clarenc ! 
 duchess . ala for both , both mine , edward and clarenc ! 
 queen elizabeth . what stay had i but edward ? and he 's 
 gone . 
 children . what stay had we but clarenc ? and he 's gone . 
 duchess . what stay had i but they ? and they are gone . 
 queen elizabeth . wa never widow had so dear a loss . 
 children . were never orphan had so dear a loss . 
 duchess . wa never mother had so dear a loss . 
 ala , i am the mother of these grief ! 
 their woe are parcel 'd , mine is gener . 
 she for an edward weep , and so do i : 
 i for a clarenc weep , so doth not she . 
 these babe for clarenc weep , and so do i : 
 i for an edward weep , so do not they . 
 ala , you three on me , threefold distress 'd , 
 pour all your tear ! i am your sorrow 's nurs , 
 and i will pamper it with lament . 
 dorset . comfort , dear mother . god is much displea 'd 
 that you take with unthank hi do . 
 in common worldli thing 't is call ungrat 
 with dull unwilling to repay a debt 
 which with a bounteou hand wa kindli lent ; 
 much more to be thu opposit with heaven , 
 for it requir the royal debt it lent you . 
 river . madam , bethink you , like a care mother , 
 of the young princ your son . send straight for him ; 
 let him be crown 'd ; in him your comfort live . 
 drown desper sorrow in dead edward 's grave , 
 and plant your joy in live edward 's throne . 
 
 enter gloucest , buckingham , derbi , 
 hast , and ratcliff 
 
 gloucest . sister , have comfort . all of us have caus 
 to wail the dim of our shine star ; 
 but none can help our harm by wail them . 
 madam , my mother , i do cri you merci ; 
 i did not see your grace . humbl on my knee 
 i crave your bless . 
 duchess . god bless thee ; and put meek in thi breast , 
 love , chariti , obedi , and true duti ! 
 gloucest . amen ! [ asid ] and make me die a good old 
 man ! 
 that is the butt end of a mother 's bless ; 
 i marvel that her grace did leav it out . 
 buckingham . you cloudi princ and heart-sorrow 
 peer , 
 that bear thi heavi mutual load of moan , 
 now cheer each other in each other 's love . 
 though we have spent our harvest of thi king , 
 we are to reap the harvest of hi son . 
 the broken rancour of your high-swol'n heart , 
 but late splinter 'd , knit , and join 'd togeth , 
 must gentli be preserv 'd , cherish 'd , and kept . 
 me seemeth good that , with some littl train , 
 forthwith from ludlow the young princ be fet 
 hither to london , to be crown 'd our king . 
 
 river . whi with some littl train , my lord of 
 buckingham ? 
 buckingham . marri , my lord , lest by a multitud 
 the new-heal 'd wound of malic should break out , 
 which would be so much the more danger 
 by how much the estat is green and yet ungovern 'd ; 
 where everi hors bear hi command rein 
 and may direct hi cours as pleas himself , 
 as well the fear of harm as harm appar , 
 in my opinion , ought to be prevent . 
 gloucest . i hope the king made peac with all of us ; 
 and the compact is firm and true in me . 
 river . and so in me ; and so , i think , in an . 
 yet , sinc it is but green , it should be put 
 to no appar likelihood of breach , 
 which hapli by much compani might be urg 'd ; 
 therefor i say with nobl buckingham 
 that it is meet so few should fetch the princ . 
 hast . and so say i . 
 gloucest . then be it so ; and go we to determin 
 who they shall be that straight shall post to ludlow . 
 madam , and you , my sister , will you go 
 to give your censur in thi busi ? 
 exeunt all but buckingham and gloucest 
 buckingham . my lord , whoever journey to the princ , 
 for god sake , let not us two stay at home ; 
 for by the way i 'll sort occas , 
 as index to the stori we late talk 'd of , 
 to part the queen 's proud kindr from the princ . 
 gloucest . my other self , my counsel 's consistori , 
 my oracl , my prophet , my dear cousin , 
 i , as a child , will go by thi direct . 
 toward ludlow then , for we 'll not stay behind . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . a street 
 
 enter one citizen at one door , and anoth at the other 
 
 first citizen . good morrow , neighbour . whither away so 
 fast ? 
 second citizen . i promis you , i scarc know myself . 
 hear you the news abroad ? 
 first citizen . ye , that the king is dead . 
 second citizen . ill news , by ' r ladi ; seldom come the 
 better . 
 i fear , i fear 'twill prove a giddi world . 
 
 enter anoth citizen 
 
 third citizen . neighbour , god speed ! 
 first citizen . give you good morrow , sir . 
 third citizen . doth the news hold of good king edward 's 
 death ? 
 second citizen . ay , sir , it is too true ; god help the while ! 
 third citizen . then , master , look to see a troublou 
 world . 
 first citizen . no , no ; by god 's good grace , hi son shall 
 reign . 
 third citizen . woe to that land that 's govern 'd by a child . 
 second citizen . in him there is a hope of govern , 
 which , in hi nonag , council under him , 
 and , in hi full and ripen year , himself , 
 no doubt , shall then , and till then , govern well . 
 first citizen . so stood the state when henri the sixth 
 wa crown 'd in pari but at nine month old . 
 third citizen . stood the state so ? no , no , good friend , 
 god wot ; 
 for then thi land wa famous enrich 'd 
 with polit grave counsel ; then the king 
 had virtuou uncl to protect hi grace . 
 first citizen . whi , so hath thi , both by hi father and 
 mother . 
 third citizen . better it were they all came by hi father , 
 or by hi father there were none at all ; 
 for emul who shall now be nearest 
 will touch us all too near , if god prevent not . 
 o , full of danger is the duke of gloucest ! 
 and the queen 's son and brother haught and proud ; 
 and were they to be rul 'd , and not to rule , 
 thi sickli land might solac as befor . 
 first citizen . come , come , we fear the worst ; all will be 
 well . 
 third citizen . when cloud are seen , wise men put on 
 their cloak ; 
 when great leav fall , then winter is at hand ; 
 when the sun set , who doth not look for night ? 
 untim storm make men expect a dearth . 
 all may be well ; but , if god sort it so , 
 't is more than we deserv or i expect . 
 second citizen . truli , the heart of men are fun of fear . 
 you can not reason almost with a man 
 that look not heavili and fun of dread . 
 third citizen . befor the day of chang , still is it so ; 
 by a divin instinct men 's mind mistrust 
 ensu danger ; as by proof we see 
 the water swell befor a boist'rou storm . 
 but leav it all to god . whither away ? 
 second citizen . marri , we were sent for to the justic . 
 third citizen . and so wa i ; i 'll bear you compani . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the archbishop of york , the young duke of york , queen elizabeth , 
 and the duchess of york 
 
 archbishop . last night , i hear , they lay at stoni stratford , 
 and at northampton they do rest to-night ; 
 to-morrow or next day they will be here . 
 duchess . i long with all my heart to see the princ . 
 i hope he is much grown sinc last i saw him . 
 queen elizabeth . but i hear no ; they say my son of york 
 ha almost overta'en him in hi growth . 
 york . ay , mother ; but i would not have it so . 
 duchess . whi , my good cousin , it is good to grow . 
 york . grandam , one night as we did sit at supper , 
 my uncl river talk 'd how i did grow 
 more than my brother . 'ay , ' quoth my uncl gloucest 
 'small herb have grace : great weed do grow apac . ' 
 and sinc , methink , i would not grow so fast , 
 becaus sweet flow'r are slow and weed make hast . 
 duchess . good faith , good faith , the say did not hold 
 in him that did object the same to thee . 
 he wa the wretched'st thing when he wa young , 
 so long a-grow and so leisur 
 that , if hi rule were true , he should be graciou . 
 archbishop . and so no doubt he is , my graciou madam . 
 duchess . i hope he is ; but yet let mother doubt . 
 york . now , by my troth , if i had been rememb'r , 
 i could have given my uncl 's grace a flout 
 to touch hi growth nearer than he touch 'd mine . 
 duchess . how , my young york ? i prithe let me hear it . 
 york . marri , they say my uncl grew so fast 
 that he could gnaw a crust at two hour old . 
 't wa full two year ere i could get a tooth . 
 grandam , thi would have been a bite jest . 
 duchess . i prithe , pretti york , who told thee thi ? 
 york . grandam , hi nurs . 
 duchess . hi nurs ! whi she wa dead ere thou wast 
 born . 
 york . if 'twere not she , i can not tell who told me . 
 queen elizabeth . a parlou boy ! go to , you are too 
 shrewd . 
 archbishop . good madam , be not angri with the child . 
 queen elizabeth . pitcher have ear . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 archbishop . here come a messeng . what news ? 
 messeng . such news , my lord , as griev me to report . 
 queen elizabeth . how doth the princ ? 
 messeng . well , madam , and in health . 
 duchess . what is thi news ? 
 messeng . lord river and lord grey 
 are sent to pomfret , and with them 
 sir thoma vaughan , prison . 
 duchess . who hath commit them ? 
 messeng . the mighti duke , gloucest and buckingham . 
 archbishop . for what offenc ? 
 messeng . the sum of all i can , i have disclo 'd . 
 whi or for what the nobl were commit 
 is all unknown to me , my graciou lord . 
 queen elizabeth . ay me , i see the ruin of my hous ! 
 the tiger now hath seiz 'd the gentl hind ; 
 insult tyranni begin to jet 
 upon the innoc and aweless throne . 
 welcom , destruct , blood , and massacr ! 
 i see , as in a map , the end of all . 
 duchess . accurs and unquiet wrangl day , 
 how mani of you have mine eye beheld ! 
 my husband lost hi life to get the crown ; 
 and often up and down my son were toss 'd 
 for me to joy and weep their gain and loss ; 
 and be seat , and domest broil 
 clean over-blown , themselv the conqueror 
 make war upon themselves-broth to brother , 
 blood to blood , self against self . o , preposter 
 and frantic outrag , end thi damn spleen , 
 or let me die , to look on death no more ! 
 queen elizabeth . come , come , my boy ; we will to 
 sanctuari . 
 madam , farewel . 
 duchess . stay , i will go with you . 
 queen elizabeth . you have no caus . 
 archbishop . [ to the queen ] my graciou ladi , go . 
 and thither bear your treasur and your good . 
 for my part , i 'll resign unto your grace 
 the seal i keep ; and so betid to me 
 as well i tender you and all of your ! 
 go , i 'll conduct you to the sanctuari . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . a street 
 
 the trumpet sound . enter the princ of wale , gloucest , buckingham , 
 catesbi , cardin bourchier , and other 
 
 buckingham . welcom , sweet princ , to london , to your 
 chamber . 
 gloucest . welcom , dear cousin , my thought ' sovereign . 
 the weari way hath made you melancholi . 
 princ . no , uncl ; but our cross on the way 
 have made it tediou , wearisom , and heavi . 
 i want more uncl here to welcom me . 
 gloucest . sweet princ , the untaint virtu of your 
 year 
 hath not yet div 'd into the world 's deceit ; 
 nor more can you distinguish of a man 
 than of hi outward show ; which , god he know , 
 seldom or never jumpeth with the heart . 
 those uncl which you want were danger ; 
 your grace attend to their sug'r word 
 but look 'd not on the poison of their heart . 
 god keep you from them and from such fals friend ! 
 princ . god keep me from fals friend ! but they were 
 none . 
 gloucest . my lord , the mayor of london come to greet 
 you . 
 
 enter the lord mayor and hi train 
 
 mayor . god bless your grace with health and happi day ! 
 princ . i thank you , good my lord , and thank you all . 
 i thought my mother and my brother york 
 would long ere thi have met us on the way . 
 fie , what a slug is hast , that he come not 
 to tell us whether they will come or no ! 
 
 enter lord hast 
 
 buckingham . and , in good time , here come the sweat 
 lord . 
 princ . welcom , my lord . what , will our mother come ? 
 hast . on what occas , god he know , not i , 
 the queen your mother and your brother york 
 have taken sanctuari . the tender princ 
 would fain have come with me to meet your grace , 
 but by hi mother wa perforc withheld . 
 buckingham . fie , what an indirect and peevish cours 
 is thi of her ? lord cardin , will your grace 
 persuad the queen to send the duke of york 
 unto hi princ brother present ? 
 if she deni , lord hast , go with him 
 and from her jealou arm pluck him perforc . 
 cardin . my lord of buckingham , if my weak oratori 
 can from hi mother win the duke of york , 
 anon expect him here ; but if she be obdur 
 to mild entreati , god in heaven forbid 
 we should infring the holi privileg 
 of bless sanctuari ! not for all thi land 
 would i be guilti of so deep a sin . 
 buckingham . you are too senseless-obstin , my lord , 
 too ceremoni and tradit . 
 weigh it but with the gross of thi age , 
 you break not sanctuari in seiz him . 
 the benefit thereof is alway grant 
 to those whose deal have deserv 'd the place 
 and those who have the wit to claim the place . 
 thi princ hath neither claim 'd it nor deserv 'd it , 
 and therefor , in mine opinion , can not have it . 
 then , take him from thenc that is not there , 
 you break no privileg nor charter there . 
 oft have i heard of sanctuari men ; 
 but sanctuari children never till now . 
 cardin . my lord , you shall o'errul my mind for onc . 
 come on , lord hast , will you go with me ? 
 hast . i go , my lord . 
 princ . good lord , make all the speedi hast you may . 
 exeunt cardin and hast 
 say , uncl gloucest , if our brother come , 
 where shall we sojourn till our coron ? 
 gloucest . where it seem best unto your royal self . 
 if i may counsel you , some day or two 
 your high shall repos you at the tower , 
 then where you pleas and shall be thought most fit 
 for your best health and recreat . 
 princ . i do not like the tower , of ani place . 
 did juliu caesar build that place , my lord ? 
 buckingham . he did , my graciou lord , begin that place , 
 which , sinc , succeed age have re-edifi . 
 princ . is it upon record , or els report 
 success from age to age , he built it ? 
 buckingham . upon record , my graciou lord . 
 princ . but say , my lord , it were not regist'r , 
 methink the truth should eve from age to age , 
 as 'twere retail 'd to all poster , 
 even to the gener all-end day . 
 gloucest . [ asid ] so wise so young , they say , do never 
 live long . 
 princ . what say you , uncl ? 
 gloucest . i say , without charact , fame live long . 
 [ asid ] thu , like the formal vice , iniqu , 
 i moral two mean in one word . 
 princ . that juliu caesar wa a famou man ; 
 with what hi valour did enrich hi wit , 
 hi wit set down to make hi valour live . 
 death make no conquest of thi conqueror ; 
 for now he live in fame , though not in life . 
 i 'll tell you what , my cousin buckingham- 
 buckingham . what , my graciou lord ? 
 princ . an if i live until i be a man , 
 i 'll win our ancient right in franc again , 
 or die a soldier as i liv 'd a king . 
 gloucest . [ asid ] short summer lightli have a forward 
 spring . 
 
 enter hast , young york , and the cardin 
 
 buckingham . now , in good time , here come the duke of 
 york . 
 princ . richard of york , how fare our love brother ? 
 york . well , my dread lord ; so must i can you now . 
 princ . ay brother , to our grief , as it is your . 
 too late he die that might have kept that titl , 
 which by hi death hath lost much majesti . 
 gloucest . how fare our cousin , nobl lord of york ? 
 york . i thank you , gentl uncl . o , my lord , 
 you said that idl weed are fast in growth . 
 the princ my brother hath outgrown me far . 
 gloucest . he hath , my lord . 
 york . and therefor is he idl ? 
 gloucest . o , my fair cousin , i must not say so . 
 york . then he is more behold to you than i . 
 gloucest . he may command me as my sovereign ; 
 but you have power in me as in a kinsman . 
 york . i pray you , uncl , give me thi dagger . 
 gloucest . my dagger , littl cousin ? with all my heart ! 
 princ . a beggar , brother ? 
 york . of my kind uncl , that i know will give , 
 and be but a toy , which is no grief to give . 
 gloucest . a greater gift than that i 'll give my cousin . 
 york . a greater gift ! o , that 's the sword to it ! 
 gloucest . ay , gentl cousin , were it light enough . 
 york . o , then , i see you will part but with light gift : 
 in weightier thing you 'll say a beggar nay . 
 gloucest . it is too heavi for your grace to wear . 
 york . i weigh it lightli , were it heavier . 
 gloucest . what , would you have my weapon , littl 
 lord ? 
 york . i would , that i might thank you as you call me . 
 gloucest . how ? 
 york . littl . 
 princ . my lord of york will still be cross in talk . 
 uncl , your grace know how to bear with him . 
 york . you mean , to bear me , not to bear with me . 
 uncl , my brother mock both you and me ; 
 becaus that i am littl , like an ape , 
 he think that you should bear me on your shoulder . 
 buckingham . with what a sharp-provid wit he reason ! 
 to mitig the scorn he give hi uncl 
 he prettili and aptli taunt himself . 
 so cun and so young is wonder . 
 gloucest . my lord , will't pleas you pass along ? 
 myself and my good cousin buckingham 
 will to your mother , to entreat of her 
 to meet you at the tower and welcom you . 
 york . what , will you go unto the tower , my lord ? 
 princ . my lord protector need will have it so . 
 york . i shall not sleep in quiet at the tower . 
 gloucest . whi , what should you fear ? 
 york . marri , my uncl clarenc ' angri ghost . 
 my grandam told me he wa murder 'd there . 
 princ . i fear no uncl dead . 
 gloucest . nor none that live , i hope . 
 princ . an if they live , i hope i need not fear . 
 but come , my lord ; and with a heavi heart , 
 think on them , go i unto the tower . 
 a sennet . 
 exeunt all but gloucest , buckingham , and catesbi 
 buckingham . think you , my lord , thi littl prate york 
 wa not incens by hi subtl mother 
 to taunt and scorn you thu opprobri ? 
 gloucest . no doubt , no doubt . o , 't is a peril boy ; 
 bold , quick , ingeni , forward , capabl . 
 he is all the mother 's , from the top to toe . 
 buckingham . well , let them rest . come hither , catesbi . 
 thou art sworn as deepli to effect what we intend 
 as close to conceal what we impart . 
 thou know'st our reason urg 'd upon the way . 
 what think'st thou ? is it not an easi matter 
 to make william lord hast of our mind , 
 for the instal of thi nobl duke 
 in the seat royal of thi famou isl ? 
 catesbi . he for hi father 's sake so love the princ 
 that he will not be won to aught against him . 
 buckingham . what think'st thou then of stanley ? will 
 not he ? 
 catesbi . he will do all in all as hast doth . 
 buckingham . well then , no more but thi : go , gentl 
 catesbi , 
 and , as it were far off , sound thou lord hast 
 how he doth stand affect to our purpos ; 
 and summon him to-morrow to the tower , 
 to sit about the coron . 
 if thou dost find him tractabl to us , 
 encourag him , and tell him all our reason ; 
 if he be leaden , ici , cold , unwil , 
 be thou so too , and so break off the talk , 
 and give us notic of hi inclin ; 
 for we to-morrow hold divid council , 
 wherein thyself shalt highli be employ 'd . 
 gloucest . commend me to lord william . tell him , 
 catesbi , 
 hi ancient knot of danger adversari 
 to-morrow are let blood at pomfret castl ; 
 and bid my lord , for joy of thi good news , 
 give mistress shore one gentl kiss the more . 
 buckingham . good catesbi , go effect thi busi soundli . 
 catesbi . my good lord both , with all the heed i can . 
 gloucest . shall we hear from you , catesbi , ere we sleep ? 
 catesbi . you shall , my lord . 
 gloucest . at crosbi hous , there shall you find us both . 
 exit catesbi 
 buckingham . now , my lord , what shall we do if we 
 perceiv 
 lord hast will not yield to our complot ? 
 gloucest . chop off hi head-someth we will 
 determin . 
 and , look when i am king , claim thou of me 
 the earldom of hereford and all the movabl 
 whereof the king my brother wa possess 'd . 
 buckingham . i 'll claim that promis at your grace 's hand . 
 gloucest . and look to have it yield with all kind . 
 come , let us sup betim , that afterward 
 we may digest our complot in some form . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 befor lord hast 's hous 
 
 enter a messeng to the door of hast 
 
 messeng . my lord , my lord ! [ knock ] 
 hast . [ within ] who knock ? 
 messeng . one from the lord stanley . 
 hast . [ within ] what is't o'clock ? 
 messeng . upon the stroke of four . 
 
 enter lord hast 
 
 hast . can not my lord stanley sleep these tediou 
 night ? 
 messeng . so it appear by that i have to say . 
 first , he commend him to your nobl self . 
 hast . what then ? 
 messeng . then certifi your lordship that thi night 
 he dreamt the boar had raze off hi helm . 
 besid , he say there are two council kept , 
 and that may be determin 'd at the one 
 which may make you and him to rue at th ' other . 
 therefor he send to know your lordship 's pleasure- 
 if you will present take hors with him 
 and with all speed post with him toward the north 
 to shun the danger that hi soul divin . 
 hast . go , fellow , go , return unto thi lord ; 
 bid him not fear the separ council : 
 hi honour and myself are at the one , 
 and at the other is my good friend catesbi ; 
 where noth can proceed that toucheth us 
 whereof i shall not have intellig . 
 tell him hi fear are shallow , without instanc ; 
 and for hi dream , i wonder he 's so simpl 
 to trust the mock'ri of unquiet slumber . 
 to fli the boar befor the boar pursu 
 were to incens the boar to follow us 
 and make pursuit where he did mean no chase . 
 go , bid thi master rise and come to me ; 
 and we will both togeth to the tower , 
 where , he shall see , the boar will use us kindli . 
 messeng . i 'll go , my lord , and tell him what you say . 
 exit 
 
 enter catesbi 
 
 catesbi . mani good morrow to my nobl lord ! 
 hast . good morrow , catesbi ; you are earli stir . 
 what news , what news , in thi our tott'r state ? 
 catesbi . it is a reel world inde , my lord ; 
 and i believ will never stand upright 
 till richard wear the garland of the realm . 
 hast . how , wear the garland ! dost thou mean the 
 crown ? 
 catesbi . ay , my good lord . 
 hast . i 'll have thi crown of mine cut from my 
 shoulder 
 befor i 'll see the crown so foul misplac 'd . 
 but canst thou guess that he doth aim at it ? 
 catesbi . ay , on my life ; and hope to find you forward 
 upon hi parti for the gain thereof ; 
 and thereupon he send you thi good news , 
 that thi same veri day your enemi , 
 the kindr of the queen , must die at pomfret . 
 hast . inde , i am no mourner for that news , 
 becaus they have been still my adversari ; 
 but that i 'll give my voic on richard 's side 
 to bar my master 's heir in true descent , 
 god know i will not do it to the death . 
 catesbi . god keep your lordship in that graciou mind ! 
 hast . but i shall laugh at thi a twelv month henc , 
 that they which brought me in my master 's hate , 
 i live to look upon their tragedi . 
 well , catesbi , ere a fortnight make me older , 
 i 'll send some pack that yet think not o n't . 
 catesbi . 't is a vile thing to die , my graciou lord , 
 when men are unprepar 'd and look not for it . 
 hast . o monstrou , monstrou ! and so fall it out 
 with river , vaughan , grey ; and so 'twill do 
 with some men els that think themselv as safe 
 as thou and i , who , as thou knowest , are dear 
 to princ richard and to buckingham . 
 catesbi . the princ both make high account of you- 
 [ asid ] for they account hi head upon the bridg . 
 hast . i know they do , and i have well deserv 'd it . 
 
 enter lord stanley 
 
 come on , come on ; where is your boar-spear , man ? 
 fear you the boar , and go so unprovid ? 
 stanley . my lord , good morrow ; good morrow , catesbi . 
 you may jest on , but , by the holi rood , 
 i do not like these sever council , i . 
 hast . my lord , i hold my life as dear as your , 
 and never in my day , i do protest , 
 wa it so preciou to me as 't is now . 
 think you , but that i know our state secur , 
 i would be so triumphant as i am ? 
 stanley . the lord at pomfret , when they rode from 
 london , 
 were jocund and suppo 'd their state were sure , 
 and they inde had no caus to mistrust ; 
 but yet you see how soon the day o'ercast . 
 thi sudden stab of rancour i misdoubt ; 
 pray god , i say , i prove a needless coward . 
 what , shall we toward the tower ? the day is spent . 
 hast . come , come , have with you . wot you what , my 
 lord ? 
 to-day the lord you talk 'd of are behead . 
 stanley . they , for their truth , might better wear their 
 head 
 than some that have accu 'd them wear their hat . 
 but come , my lord , let 's away . 
 
 enter hast , a pursuiv 
 
 hast . go on befor ; i 'll talk with thi good fellow . 
 exeunt stanley and catesbi 
 how now , hast ! how goe the world with thee ? 
 pursuiv . the better that your lordship pleas to ask . 
 hast . i tell thee , man , 't is better with me now 
 than when thou met'st me last where now we meet : 
 then wa i go prison to the tower 
 by the suggest of the queen 's alli ; 
 but now , i tell thee-keep it to thyself- 
 thi day those enerni are put to death , 
 and i in better state than e'er i wa . 
 pursuiv . god hold it , to your honour 's good content ! 
 hast . gramerci , hast ; there , drink that for me . 
 [ throw him hi purs ] 
 pursuiv . i thank your honour . exit 
 
 enter a priest 
 
 priest . well met , my lord ; i am glad to see your honour . 
 hast . i thank thee , good sir john , with all my heart . 
 i am in your debt for your last exercis ; 
 come the next sabbath , and i will content you . 
 [ he whisper in hi ear ] 
 priest . i 'll wait upon your lordship . 
 
 enter buckingham 
 
 buckingham . what , talk with a priest , lord 
 chamberlain ! 
 your friend at pomfret , they do need the priest : 
 your honour hath no shrive work in hand . 
 hast . good faith , and when i met thi holi man , 
 the men you talk of came into my mind . 
 what , go you toward the tower ? 
 buckingham . i do , my lord , but long i can not stay there ; 
 i shall return befor your lordship thenc . 
 hast . nay , like enough , for i stay dinner there . 
 buckingham . [ asid ] and supper too , although thou 
 knowest it not.- 
 come , will you go ? 
 hast . i 'll wait upon your lordship . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 pomfret castl 
 
 enter sir richard ratcliff , with halberd , carri the nobl , 
 river , grey , and vaughan , to death 
 
 river . sir richard ratcliff , let me tell thee thi : 
 to-day shalt thou behold a subject die 
 for truth , for duti , and for loyalti . 
 grey . god bless the princ from all the pack of you ! 
 a knot you are of damn blood-suck . 
 vaughan . you live that shall cri woe for thi hereaft . 
 ratcliff . dispatch ; the limit of your live is out . 
 river . o pomfret , pomfret ! o thou bloodi prison , 
 fatal and omin to nobl peer ! 
 within the guilti closur of thi wall 
 richard the second here wa hack 'd to death ; 
 and for more slander to thi dismal seat , 
 we give to thee our guiltless blood to drink . 
 grey . now margaret 's curs is fall'n upon our head , 
 when she exclaim 'd on hast , you , and i , 
 for stand by when richard stabb 'd her son . 
 river . then cur 'd she richard , then cur 'd she 
 buckingham , 
 then cur 'd she hast . o , rememb , god , 
 to hear her prayer for them , as now for us ! 
 and for my sister , and her princ son , 
 be satisfi , dear god , with our true blood , 
 which , as thou know'st , unjustli must be spilt . 
 ratcliff . make hast ; the hour of death is expiat . 
 river . come , grey ; come , vaughan ; let us here embrac . 
 farewel , until we meet again in heaven . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > 
 
 london . the tower 
 
 enter buckingham , derbi , hast , the bishop of eli , ratcliff , lovel , 
 with other and seat themselv at a tabl 
 
 hast . now , nobl peer , the caus whi we are met 
 is to determin of the coron . 
 in god 's name speak-when is the royal day ? 
 buckingham . is all thing readi for the royal time ? 
 derbi . it is , and want but nomin . 
 bishop of eli . to-morrow then i judg a happi day . 
 buckingham . who know the lord protector 's mind 
 herein ? 
 who is most inward with the nobl duke ? 
 bishop of eli . your grace , we think , should soonest know 
 hi mind . 
 buckingham . we know each other 's face ; for our heart , 
 he know no more of mine than i of your ; 
 or i of hi , my lord , than you of mine . 
 lord hast , you and he are near in love . 
 hast . i thank hi grace , i know he love me well ; 
 but for hi purpos in the coron 
 i have not sound him , nor he deliv 'd 
 hi graciou pleasur ani way therein . 
 but you , my honour lord , may name the time ; 
 and in the duke 's behalf i 'll give my voic , 
 which , i presum , he 'll take in gentl part . 
 
 enter gloucest 
 
 bishop of eli . in happi time , here come the duke himself . 
 gloucest . my nobl lord and cousin an , good morrow . 
 i have been long a sleeper , but i trust 
 my absenc doth neglect no great design 
 which by my presenc might have been conclud . 
 buckingham . had you not come upon your cue , my lord , 
 william lord hast had pronounc 'd your part- 
 i mean , your voic for crown of the king . 
 gloucest . than my lord hast no man might be 
 bolder ; 
 hi lordship know me well and love me well . 
 my lord of eli , when i wa last in holborn 
 i saw good strawberri in your garden there . 
 i do beseech you send for some of them . 
 bishop of eli . marri and will , my lord , with all my heart . 
 exit 
 gloucest . cousin of buckingham , a word with you . 
 [ take him asid ] 
 catesbi hath sound hast in our busi , 
 and find the testi gentleman so hot 
 that he will lose hi head ere give consent 
 hi master 's child , as worship he term it , 
 shall lose the royalti of england 's throne . 
 buckingham . withdraw yourself awhil ; i 'll go with you . 
 exeunt gloucest and buckingham 
 derbi . we have not yet set down thi day of triumph . 
 to-morrow , in my judgment , is too sudden ; 
 for i myself am not so well provid 
 as els i would be , were the day prolong 'd . 
 
 re-ent the bishop of eli 
 
 bishop of eli . where is my lord the duke of gloucest ? 
 i have sent for these strawberri . 
 hast . hi grace look cheer and smooth thi 
 morn ; 
 there 's some conceit or other like him well 
 when that he bid good morrow with such spirit . 
 i think there 's never a man in christendom 
 can lesser hide hi love or hate than he ; 
 for by hi face straight shall you know hi heart . 
 derbi . what of hi heart perceiv you in hi face 
 by ani livelihood he show 'd to-day ? 
 hast . marri , that with no man here he is offend ; 
 for , were he , he had shown it in hi look . 
 
 re-ent gloucest and buckingham 
 
 gloucest . i pray you all , tell me what they deserv 
 that do conspir my death with devilish plot 
 of damn witchcraft , and that have prevail 'd 
 upon my bodi with their hellish charm ? 
 hast . the tender love i bear your grace , my lord , 
 make me most forward in thi princ presenc 
 to doom th ' offend , whosoe' they be . 
 i say , my lord , they have deserv death . 
 gloucest . then be your eye the wit of their evil . 
 look how i am bewitch 'd ; behold , mine arm 
 is like a blast sapl wither 'd up . 
 and thi is edward 's wife , that monstrou witch , 
 consort with that harlot strumpet shore , 
 that by their witchcraft thu have mark me . 
 hast . if they have done thi deed , my nobl lord- 
 gloucest . if ? -thou protector of thi damn strumpet , 
 talk'st thou to me of if ? thou art a traitor . 
 off with hi head ! now by saint paul i swear 
 i will not dine until i see the same . 
 lovel and ratcliff , look that it be done . 
 the rest that love me , rise and follow me . 
 exeunt all but hast , lovel , and ratcliff 
 hast . woe , woe , for england ! not a whit for me ; 
 for i , too fond , might have prevent thi . 
 stanley did dream the boar did raze our helm , 
 and i did scorn it and disdain to fli . 
 three time to-day my foot-cloth hors did stumbl , 
 and start when he look 'd upon the tower , 
 as loath to bear me to the slaughter-hous . 
 o , now i need the priest that spake to me ! 
 i now repent i told the pursuiv , 
 as too triumph , how mine enemi 
 to-day at pomfret bloodili were butcher 'd , 
 and i myself secur in grace and favour . 
 o margaret , margaret , now thi heavi curs 
 is light on poor hast ' wretch head ! 
 ratcliff . come , come , dispatch ; the duke would be at 
 dinner . 
 make a short shrift ; he long to see your head . 
 hast . o momentari grace of mortal men , 
 which we more hunt for than the grace of god ! 
 who build hi hope in air of your good look 
 live like a drunken sailor on a mast , 
 readi with everi nod to tumbl down 
 into the fatal bowel of the deep . 
 lovel . come , come , dispatch ; 't is bootless to exclaim . 
 hast . o bloodi richard ! miser england ! 
 i prophesi the fearfull'st time to thee 
 that ever wretch age hath look 'd upon . 
 come , lead me to the block ; bear him my head . 
 they smile at me who shortli shall be dead . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the tower-wal 
 
 enter gloucest and buckingham in rotten armour , marvel ill-favour 
 
 gloucest . come , cousin , canst thou quak and chang 
 thi colour , 
 murder thi breath in middl of a word , 
 and then again begin , and stop again , 
 as if thou were distraught and mad with terror ? 
 buckingham . tut , i can counterfeit the deep tragedian ; 
 speak and look back , and pri on everi side , 
 trembl and start at wag of a straw , 
 intend deep suspicion . ghastli look 
 are at my servic , like enforc smile ; 
 and both are readi in their offic 
 at ani time to grace my stratagem . 
 but what , is catesbi gone ? 
 gloucest . he is ; and , see , he bring the mayor along . 
 
 enter the lord mayor and catesbi 
 
 buckingham . lord mayor- 
 gloucest . look to the drawbridg there ! 
 buckingham . hark ! a drum . 
 gloucest . catesbi , o'erlook the wall . 
 buckingham . lord mayor , the reason we have sent- 
 gloucest . look back , defend thee ; here are enemi . 
 buckingham . god and our innoc defend and guard us ! 
 
 enter lovel and ratcliff , with hast ' head 
 
 gloucest . be patient ; they are friends-ratcliff and lovel . 
 lovel . here is the head of that ignobl traitor , 
 the danger and unsuspect hast . 
 gloucest . so dear i lov 'd the man that i must weep . 
 i took him for the plainest harmless creatur 
 that breath 'd upon the earth a christian ; 
 made him my book , wherein my soul record 
 the histori of all her secret thought . 
 so smooth he daub 'd hi vice with show of virtu 
 that , hi appar open guilt omit , 
 i mean hi convers with shore 's wife- 
 he liv 'd from all attaind of suspect . 
 buckingham . well , well , he wa the covert'st shelt'r 
 traitor 
 that ever liv 'd . 
 would you imagin , or almost believe- 
 were't not that by great preserv 
 we live to tell it-that the subtl traitor 
 thi day had plot , in the council-hous , 
 to murder me and my good lord of gloucest . 
 mayor . had he done so ? 
 gloucest . what ! think you we are turk or infidel ? 
 or that we would , against the form of law , 
 proceed thu rashli in the villain 's death 
 but that the extrem peril of the case , 
 the peac of england and our person ' safeti , 
 enforc 'd us to thi execut ? 
 mayor . now , fair befal you ! he deserv 'd hi death ; 
 and your good grace both have well proceed 
 to warn fals traitor from the like attempt . 
 i never look 'd for better at hi hand 
 after he onc fell in with mistress shore . 
 buckingham . yet had we not determin 'd he should die 
 until your lordship came to see hi end- 
 which now the love hast of these our friend , 
 someth against our mean , have prevented- 
 becaus , my lord , i would have had you heard 
 the traitor speak , and timor confess 
 the manner and the purpos of hi treason : 
 that you might well have signifi the same 
 unto the citizen , who hapli may 
 misconst us in him and wail hi death . 
 mayor . but , my good lord , your grace 's word shall serv 
 as well as i had seen and heard him speak ; 
 and do not doubt , right nobl princ both , 
 but i 'll acquaint our duteou citizen 
 with all your just proceed in thi caus . 
 gloucest . and to that end we wish 'd your lordship here , 
 t ' avoid the the the censur of the carp world . 
 buckingham . which sinc you come too late of our intent , 
 yet wit what you hear we did intend . 
 and so , my good lord mayor , we bid farewel . 
 exit lord mayor 
 gloucest . go , after , after , cousin buckingham . 
 the mayor toward guildhal hie him in an post . 
 there , at your meet'st advantag of the time , 
 infer the bastardi of edward 's children . 
 tell them how edward put to death a citizen 
 onli for say he would make hi son 
 heir to the crown-mean inde hi hous , 
 which by the sign thereof wa term so . 
 moreov , urg hi hate luxuri 
 and bestial appetit in chang of lust , 
 which stretch 'd unto their servant , daughter , wive , 
 even where hi rage eye or savag heart 
 without control lust to make a prey . 
 nay , for a need , thu far come near my person : 
 tell them , when that my mother went with child 
 of that insati edward , nobl york 
 my princ father then had war in franc 
 and , by true comput of the time , 
 found that the issu wa not hi begot ; 
 which well appear in hi lineament , 
 be noth like the nobl duke my father . 
 yet touch thi sparingli , as 'twere far off ; 
 becaus , my lord , you know my mother live . 
 buckingham . doubt not , my lord , i 'll play the orat 
 as if the golden fee for which i plead 
 were for myself ; and so , my lord , adieu . 
 gloucest . if you thrive well , bring them to baynard 's 
 castl ; 
 where you shall find me well accompani 
 with reverend father and well learn bishop . 
 buckingham . i go ; and toward three or four o'clock 
 look for the news that the guildhal afford . exit 
 gloucest . go , lovel , with all speed to doctor shaw . 
 [ to catesbi ] go thou to friar penker . bid them both 
 meet me within thi hour at baynard 's castl . 
 exeunt all but gloucest 
 now will i go to take some privi order 
 to draw the brat of clarenc out of sight , 
 and to give order that no manner person 
 have ani time recours unto the princ . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . a street 
 
 enter a scriven 
 
 scriven . here is the indict of the good lord hast ; 
 which in a set hand fairli is engross 'd 
 that it may be to-day read o'er in paul 's . 
 and mark how well the sequel hang togeth : 
 eleven hour i have spent to write it over , 
 for yesternight by catesbi wa it sent me ; 
 the preced wa full as long a-do ; 
 and yet within these five hour hast liv 'd , 
 untaint , unexamin 'd , free , at liberti . 
 here 's a good world the while ! who is so gro 
 that can not see thi palpabl devic ? 
 yet who 's so bold but say he see it not ? 
 bad is the world ; and all will come to nought , 
 when such ill deal must be seen in thought . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . baynard 's castl 
 
 enter gloucest and buckingham , at sever door 
 
 gloucest . how now , how now ! what say the citizen ? 
 buckingham . now , by the holi mother of our lord , 
 the citizen are mum , say not a word . 
 gloucest . touch 'd you the bastardi of edward 's 
 children ? 
 buckingham . i did ; with hi contract with ladi luci , 
 and hi contract by deputi in franc ; 
 th ' insati greedi of hi desir , 
 and hi enforc of the citi wive ; 
 hi tyranni for trifl ; hi own bastardi , 
 as be got , your father then in franc , 
 and hi resembl , be not like the duke . 
 withal i did infer your lineament , 
 be the right idea of your father , 
 both in your form and nobl of mind ; 
 laid open all your victori in scotland , 
 your disciplin in war , wisdom in peac , 
 your bounti , virtu , fair humil ; 
 inde , left noth fit for your purpos 
 untouch 'd or slightli handl in discours . 
 and when mine oratori drew toward end 
 i bid them that did love their countri 's good 
 cri 'god save richard , england 's royal king ! ' 
 gloucest . and did they so ? 
 buckingham . no , so god help me , they spake not a word ; 
 but , like dumb statu or breath stone , 
 star 'd each on other , and look 'd deadli pale . 
 which when i saw , i reprehend them , 
 and ask 'd the mayor what meant thi wilful silenc . 
 hi answer wa , the peopl were not use 
 to be spoke to but by the record . 
 then he wa urg 'd to tell my tale again . 
 'thu saith the duke , thu hath the duke inferr'd'- 
 but noth spoke in warrant from himself . 
 when he had done , some follow of mine own 
 at lower end of the hall hurl 'd up their cap , 
 and some ten voic cri 'god save king richard ! ' 
 and thu i took the vantag of those few- 
 'thank , gentl citizen and friend , ' quoth i 
 'thi gener applaus and cheer shout 
 argu your wisdom and your love to richard . ' 
 and even here brake off and came away . 
 gloucest . what , tongueless block were they ? would 
 they not speak ? 
 will not the mayor then and hi brethren come ? 
 buckingham . the mayor is here at hand . intend some fear ; 
 be not you spoke with but by mighti suit ; 
 and look you get a prayer-book in your hand , 
 and stand between two churchmen , good my lord ; 
 for on that ground i 'll make a holi descant ; 
 and be not easili won to our request . 
 play the maid 's part : still answer nay , and take it . 
 gloucest . i go ; and if you plead as well for them 
 as i can say nay to thee for myself , 
 no doubt we bring it to a happi issu . 
 buckingham . go , go , up to the lead ; the lord mayor 
 knock . exit gloucest 
 
 enter the lord mayor , aldermen , and citizen 
 
 welcom , my lord . i danc attend here ; 
 i think the duke will not be spoke withal . 
 
 enter catesbi 
 
 now , catesbi , what say your lord to my request ? 
 catesbi . he doth entreat your grace , my nobl lord , 
 to visit him to-morrow or next day . 
 he is within , with two right reverend father , 
 divin bent to medit ; 
 and in no worldli suit would he be mov 'd , 
 to draw him from hi holi exercis . 
 buckingham . return , good catesbi , to the graciou duke ; 
 tell him , myself , the mayor and aldermen , 
 in deep design , in matter of great moment , 
 no less import than our gener good , 
 are come to have some confer with hi grace . 
 catesbi . i 'll signifi so much unto him straight . exit 
 buckingham . ah ha , my lord , thi princ is not an edward ! 
 he is not loll on a lewd love-b , 
 but on hi knee at medit ; 
 not dalli with a brace of courtezan , 
 but medit with two deep divin ; 
 not sleep , to engross hi idl bodi , 
 but pray , to enrich hi watch soul . 
 happi were england would thi virtuou princ 
 take on hi grace the sovereignti thereof ; 
 but , sure , i fear we shall not win him to it . 
 mayor . marri , god defend hi grace should say us nay ! 
 buckingham . i fear he will . here catesbi come again . 
 
 re-ent catesbi 
 
 now , catesbi , what say hi grace ? 
 catesbi . my lord , 
 he wonder to what end you have assembl 
 such troop of citizen to come to him . 
 hi grace not be warn 'd thereof befor , 
 he fear , my lord , you mean no good to him . 
 buckingham . sorri i am my nobl cousin should 
 suspect me that i mean no good to him . 
 by heaven , we come to him in perfect love ; 
 and so onc more return and tell hi grace . 
 exit catesbi 
 when holi and devout religi men 
 are at their bead , 't is much to draw them thenc , 
 so sweet is zealou contempl . 
 
 enter gloucest aloft , between two bishop . 
 catesbi return 
 
 mayor . see where hi grace stand 'tween two clergymen ! 
 buckingham . two prop of virtu for a christian princ , 
 to stay him from the fall of vaniti ; 
 and , see , a book of prayer in hi hand , 
 true ornament to know a holi man . 
 famou plantagenet , most graciou princ , 
 lend favour ear to our request , 
 and pardon us the interrupt 
 of thi devot and right christian zeal . 
 gloucest . my lord , there need no such apolog : 
 i do beseech your grace to pardon me , 
 who , earnest in the servic of my god , 
 deferr 'd the visit of my friend . 
 but , leav thi , what is your grace 's pleasur ? 
 buckingham . even that , i hope , which pleaseth god abov , 
 and all good men of thi ungovern 'd isl . 
 gloucest . i do suspect i have done some offenc 
 that seem disgraci in the citi 's eye , 
 and that you come to reprehend my ignor . 
 buckingham . you have , my lord . would it might pleas 
 your grace , 
 on our entreati , to amend your fault ! 
 gloucest . els wherefor breath i in a christian land ? 
 buckingham . know then , it is your fault that you resign 
 the suprem seat , the throne majest , 
 the scept'r offic of your ancestor , 
 your state of fortun and your due of birth , 
 the lineal glori of your royal hous , 
 to the corrupt of a blemish 'd stock ; 
 while in the mild of your sleepi thought , 
 which here we waken to our countri 's good , 
 the nobl isl doth want her proper limb ; 
 her face defac 'd with scar of infami , 
 her royal stock graft with ignobl plant , 
 and almost should'r in the swallow gulf 
 of dark forget and deep oblivion . 
 which to recur , we heartili solicit 
 your graciou self to take on you the charg 
 and kingli govern of thi your land- 
 not as protector , steward , substitut , 
 or lowli factor for anoth 's gain ; 
 but as success , from blood to blood , 
 your right of birth , your emperi , your own . 
 for thi , consort with the citizen , 
 your veri worship and love friend , 
 and by their vehement instig , 
 in thi just caus come i to move your grace . 
 gloucest . i can not tell if to depart in silenc 
 or bitterli to speak in your reproof 
 best fitteth my degre or your condit . 
 if not to answer , you might hapli think 
 tongue-ti ambit , not repli , yield 
 to bear the golden yoke of sovereignti , 
 which fondli you would here impos on me ; 
 if to reprov you for thi suit of your , 
 so season 'd with your faith love to me , 
 then , on the other side , i check 'd my friend . 
 therefore-to speak , and to avoid the first , 
 and then , in speak , not to incur the last- 
 definit thu i answer you : 
 your love deserv my thank , but my desert 
 unmerit shun your high request . 
 first , if all obstacl were cut away , 
 and that my path were even to the crown , 
 as the ripe revenu and due of birth , 
 yet so much is my poverti of spirit , 
 so mighti and so mani my defect , 
 that i would rather hide me from my greatness- 
 be a bark to brook no mighti sea- 
 than in my great covet to be hid , 
 and in the vapour of my glori smother 'd . 
 but , god be thank 'd , there is no need of me- 
 and much i need to help you , were there need . 
 the royal tree hath left us royal fruit 
 which , mellow 'd by the steal hour of time , 
 will well becom the seat of majesti 
 and make , no doubt , us happi by hi reign . 
 on him i lay that you would lay on me- 
 the right and fortun of hi happi star , 
 which god defend that i should wring from him . 
 buckingham . my lord , thi argu conscienc in your 
 grace ; 
 but the respect thereof are nice and trivial , 
 all circumst well consid . 
 you say that edward is your brother 's son . 
 so say we too , but not by edward 's wife ; 
 for first wa he contract to ladi lucy- 
 your mother live a wit to hi vow- 
 and afterward by substitut betroth 'd 
 to bona , sister to the king of franc . 
 these both put off , a poor petition , 
 a care-craz 'd mother to a mani son , 
 a beauty-wan and distress widow , 
 even in the afternoon of her best day , 
 made prize and purchas of hi wanton eye , 
 seduc 'd the pitch and height of hi degre 
 to base declens and loath 'd bigami . 
 by her , in hi unlaw bed , he got 
 thi edward , whom our manner call the princ . 
 more bitterli could i expostul , 
 save that , for rever to some aliv , 
 i give a spare limit to my tongu . 
 then , good my lord , take to your royal self 
 thi proffer 'd benefit of digniti ; 
 if not to bless us and the land withal , 
 yet to draw forth your nobl ancestri 
 from the corrupt of abus time 
 unto a lineal true-deriv cours . 
 mayor . do , good my lord ; your citizen entreat you . 
 buckingham . refus not , mighti lord , thi proffer 'd love . 
 catesbi . o , make them joy , grant their law suit ! 
 gloucest . ala , whi would you heap thi care on me ? 
 i am unfit for state and majesti . 
 i do beseech you , take it not amiss : 
 i can not nor i will not yield to you . 
 buckingham . if you refus it-a , in love and zeal , 
 loath to depos the child , your brother 's son ; 
 as well we know your tender of heart 
 and gentl , kind , effemin remors , 
 which we have note in you to your kindr 
 and egal inde to all estates- 
 yet know , whe'er you accept our suit or no , 
 your brother 's son shall never reign our king ; 
 but we will plant some other in the throne 
 to the disgrac and downfal of your hous ; 
 and in thi resolut here we leav you . 
 come , citizen . zound , i 'll entreat no more . 
 gloucest . o , do not swear , my lord of buckingham . 
 exeunt buckingham , mayor , and citizen 
 catesbi . call him again , sweet princ , accept their suit . 
 if you deni them , all the land will rue it . 
 gloucest . will you enforc me to a world of care ? 
 call them again . i am not made of stone , 
 but penetr to your kind entreati , 
 albeit against my conscienc and my soul . 
 
 re-ent buckingham and the rest 
 
 cousin of buckingham , and sage grave men , 
 sinc you will buckl fortun on my back , 
 to bear her burden , whe'er i will or no , 
 i must have patienc to endur the load ; 
 but if black scandal or foul-fac 'd reproach 
 attend the sequel of your imposit , 
 your mere enforc shall acquitt me 
 from all the impur blot and stain thereof ; 
 for god doth know , and you may partli see , 
 how far i am from the desir of thi . 
 mayor . god bless your grace ! we see it , and will say it . 
 gloucest . in say so , you shall but say the truth . 
 buckingham . then i salut you with thi royal title- 
 long live king richard , england 's worthi king ! 
 all . amen . 
 buckingham . to-morrow may it pleas you to be crown 'd ? 
 gloucest . even when you pleas , for you will have it so . 
 buckingham . to-morrow , then , we will attend your grace ; 
 and so , most joy , we take our leav . 
 gloucest . [ to the bishop ] come , let us to our holi 
 work again . 
 farewel , my cousin ; farewel , gentl friend . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 
 london . befor the tower 
 
 enter queen elizabeth , duchess of york , and marqui of dorset , at one door ; 
 ann , duchess of gloucest , lead ladi margaret plantagenet , 
 clarenc 's young daughter , at anoth door 
 
 duchess . who meet us here ? my niec plantagenet , 
 led in the hand of her kind aunt of gloucest ? 
 now , for my life , she 's wand'r to the tower , 
 on pure heart 's love , to greet the tender princ . 
 daughter , well met . 
 ann . god give your grace both 
 a happi and a joy time of day ! 
 queen elizabeth . as much to you , good sister ! whither 
 away ? 
 ann . no farther than the tower ; and , as i guess , 
 upon the like devot as yourselv , 
 to gratul the gentl princ there . 
 queen elizabeth . kind sister , thank ; we 'll enter 
 all togeth . 
 
 enter brakenburi 
 
 and in good time , here the lieuten come . 
 master lieuten , pray you , by your leav , 
 how doth the princ , and my young son of york ? 
 brakenburi . right well , dear madam . by your patienc , 
 i may not suffer you to visit them . 
 the king hath strictli charg 'd the contrari . 
 queen elizabeth . the king ! who 's that ? 
 brakenburi . i mean the lord protector . 
 queen elizabeth . the lord protect him from that kingli 
 titl ! 
 hath he set bound between their love and me ? 
 i am their mother ; who shall bar me from them ? 
 duchess . i am their father 's mother ; i will see them . 
 ann . their aunt i am in law , in love their mother . 
 then bring me to their sight ; i 'll bear thi blame , 
 and take thi offic from thee on my peril . 
 brakenburi . no , madam , no . i may not leav it so ; 
 i am bound by oath , and therefor pardon me . exit 
 
 enter stanley 
 
 stanley . let me but meet you , ladi , one hour henc , 
 and i 'll salut your grace of york as mother 
 and reverend looker-on of two fair queen . 
 [ to ann ] come , madam , you must straight to 
 westminst , 
 there to be crown richard 's royal queen . 
 queen elizabeth . ah , cut my lace asund 
 that my pent heart may have some scope to beat , 
 or els i swoon with thi dead-kil news ! 
 ann . despit tide ! o unpleas news ! 
 dorset . be of good cheer ; mother , how fare your grace ? 
 queen elizabeth . o dorset , speak not to me , get thee 
 gone ! 
 death and destruct dog thee at thi heel ; 
 thi mother 's name is omin to children . 
 if thou wilt outstrip death , go cross the sea , 
 and live with richmond , from the reach of hell . 
 go , hie thee , hie thee from thi slaughter-hous , 
 lest thou increas the number of the dead , 
 and make me die the thrall of margaret 's curs , 
 nor mother , wife , nor england 's count queen . 
 stanley . full of wise care is thi your counsel , madam . 
 take all the swift advantag of the hour ; 
 you shall have letter from me to my son 
 in your behalf , to meet you on the way . 
 be not ta'en tardi by unwis delay . 
 duchess . o ill-dispers wind of miseri ! 
 o my accurs womb , the bed of death ! 
 a cockatric hast thou hatch 'd to the world , 
 whose unavoid eye is murder . 
 stanley . come , madam , come ; i in all hast wa sent . 
 ann . and i with all unwilling will go . 
 o , would to god that the inclus verg 
 of golden metal that must round my brow 
 were red-hot steel , to sear me to the brain ! 
 anoint let me be with deadli venom , 
 and die ere men can say 'god save the queen ! ' 
 queen elizabeth . go , go , poor soul ; i envi not thi glori . 
 to feed my humour , wish thyself no harm . 
 ann . no , whi ? when he that is my husband now 
 came to me , as i follow 'd henri 's cors ; 
 when scarc the blood wa well wash 'd from hi hand 
 which issu from my other angel husband , 
 and that dear saint which then i weep follow'd- 
 o , when , i say , i look 'd on richard 's face , 
 thi wa my wish : 'be thou ' quoth i 'accur 'd 
 for make me , so young , so old a widow ; 
 and when thou wed'st , let sorrow haunt thi bed ; 
 and be thi wife , if ani be so mad , 
 more miser by the life of thee 
 than thou hast made me by my dear lord 's death . ' 
 lo , ere i can repeat thi curs again , 
 within so small a time , my woman 's heart 
 grossli grew captiv to hi honey word 
 and prov 'd the subject of mine own soul 's curs , 
 which hitherto hath held my eye from rest ; 
 for never yet one hour in hi bed 
 did i enjoy the golden dew of sleep , 
 but with hi timor dream wa still awak 'd . 
 besid , he hate me for my father warwick ; 
 and will , no doubt , shortli be rid of me . 
 queen elizabeth . poor heart , adieu ! i piti thi complain . 
 ann . no more than with my soul i mourn for your . 
 dorset . farewel , thou woeful welcom of glori ! 
 ann . adieu , poor soul , that tak'st thi leav of it ! 
 duchess . [ to dorset ] go thou to richmond , and good 
 fortun guid thee ! 
 [ to ann ] go thou to richard , and good angel tend 
 thee ! [ to queen elizabeth ] go thou to sanctuari , and good 
 thought possess thee ! 
 i to my grave , where peac and rest lie with me ! 
 eighti odd year of sorrow have i seen , 
 and each hour 's joy wreck 'd with a week of teen . 
 queen elizabeth . stay , yet look back with me unto the 
 tower . 
 piti , you ancient stone , those tender babe 
 whom envi hath immur 'd within your wall , 
 rough cradl for such littl pretti one . 
 rude rag nurs , old sullen playfellow 
 for tender princ , use my babi well . 
 so foolish sorrow bid your stone farewel . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 sound a sennet . enter richard , in pomp , as king ; buckingham , catesbi , 
 ratcliff , lovel , a page , and other 
 
 king richard . stand all apart . cousin of buckingham ! 
 buckingham . my graciou sovereign ? 
 king richard . give me thi hand . 
 [ here he ascendeth the throne . sound ] 
 thu high , by thi advic 
 and thi assist , is king richard seat . 
 but shall we wear these glori for a day ; 
 or shall they last , and we rejoic in them ? 
 buckingham . still live they , and for ever let them last ! 
 king richard . ah , buckingham , now do i play the touch , 
 to tri if thou be current gold inde . 
 young edward lives-think now what i would speak . 
 buckingham . say on , my love lord . 
 king richard . whi , buckingham , i say i would be king . 
 buckingham . whi , so you are , my thrice-renown lord . 
 king richard . ha ! am i king ? 't is so ; but edward live . 
 buckingham . true , nobl princ . 
 king richard . o bitter consequ : 
 that edward still should live-tru nobl princ ! 
 cousin , thou wast not wont to be so dull . 
 shall i be plain ? i wish the bastard dead . 
 and i would have it suddenli perform 'd . 
 what say'st thou now ? speak suddenli , be brief . 
 buckingham . your grace may do your pleasur . 
 king richard . tut , tut , thou art all ice ; thi kind freez . 
 say , have i thi consent that they shall die ? 
 buckingham . give me some littl breath , some paus , 
 dear lord , 
 befor i posit speak in thi . 
 i will resolv you herein present . exit 
 catesbi . [ asid to anoth ] the king is angri ; see , he 
 gnaw hi lip . 
 king richard . i will convers with iron-wit fool 
 [ descend from the throne ] 
 and unrespect boy ; none are for me 
 that look into me with consider eye . 
 high-reach buckingham grow circumspect . 
 boy ! 
 page . my lord ? 
 king richard . know'st thou not ani whom corrupt 
 gold 
 will tempt unto a close exploit of death ? 
 page . i know a discont gentleman 
 whose humbl mean match not hi haughti spirit . 
 gold were as good as twenti orat , 
 and will , no doubt , tempt him to anyth . 
 king richard . what is hi name ? 
 page . hi name , my lord , is tyrrel . 
 king richard . i partli know the man . go , call him hither , 
 boy . exit page 
 the deep-revolv witti buckingham 
 no more shall be the neighbour to my counsel . 
 hath he so long held out with me , untir 'd , 
 and stop he now for breath ? well , be it so . 
 
 enter stanley 
 
 how now , lord stanley ! what 's the news ? 
 stanley . know , my love lord , 
 the marqui dorset , as i hear , is fled 
 to richmond , in the part where he abid . [ stand apart ] 
 king richard . come hither , catesbi . rumour it abroad 
 that ann , my wife , is veri grievou sick ; 
 i will take order for her keep close . 
 inquir me out some mean poor gentleman , 
 whom i will marri straight to clarenc ' daughter- 
 the boy is foolish , and i fear not him . 
 look how thou dream'st ! i say again , give out 
 that ann , my queen , is sick and like to die . 
 about it ; for it stand me much upon 
 to stop all hope whose growth may damag me . 
 exit catesbi 
 i must be marri to my brother 's daughter , 
 or els my kingdom stand on brittl glass . 
 murder her brother , and then marri her ! 
 uncertain way of gain ! but i am in 
 so far in blood that sin will pluck on sin . 
 tear-fal piti dwell not in thi eye . 
 
 re-ent page , with tyrrel 
 
 is thi name tyrrel ? 
 tyrrel . jame tyrrel , and your most obedi subject . 
 king richard . art thou , inde ? 
 tyrrel . prove me , my graciou lord . 
 king richard . dar'st'thou resolv to kill a friend of mine ? 
 tyrrel . pleas you ; 
 but i had rather kill two enemi . 
 king richard . whi , then thou hast it . two deep enemi , 
 foe to my rest , and my sweet sleep 's disturb , 
 are they that i would have thee deal upon . 
 tyrrel , i mean those bastard in the tower . 
 tyrrel . let me have open mean to come to them , 
 and soon i 'll rid you from the fear of them . 
 king richard . thou sing'st sweet music . hark , come 
 hither , tyrrel . 
 go , by thi token . rise , and lend thine ear . [ whisper ] 
 there is no more but so : say it is done , 
 and i will love thee and prefer thee for it . 
 tyrrel . i will dispatch it straight . exit 
 
 re-ent buckingham 
 
 buckingham . my lord , i have consid 'd in my mind 
 the late request that you did sound me in . 
 king richard . well , let that rest . dorset is fled to 
 richmond . 
 buckingham . i hear the news , my lord . 
 king richard . stanley , he is your wife 's son : well , look 
 unto it . 
 buckingham . my lord , i claim the gift , my due by promis , 
 for which your honour and your faith is pawn 'd : 
 th ' earldom of hereford and the movabl 
 which you have promis i shall possess . 
 king richard . stanley , look to your wife ; if she convey 
 letter to richmond , you shall answer it . 
 buckingham . what say your high to my just request ? 
 king richard . i do rememb me : henri the sixth 
 did prophesi that richmond should be king , 
 when richmond wa a littl peevish boy . 
 a king ! -perhaps- 
 buckingham . my lord- 
 king richard . how chanc the prophet could not at that 
 time 
 have told me , i be by , that i should kill him ? 
 buckingham . my lord , your promis for the earldom- 
 king richard . richmond ! when last i wa at exet , 
 the mayor in courtesi show 'd me the castl 
 and call 'd it rugemount , at which name i start , 
 becaus a bard of ireland told me onc 
 i should not live long after i saw richmond . 
 buckingham . my lord- 
 king richard . ay , what 's o'clock ? 
 buckingham . i am thu bold to put your grace in mind 
 of what you promi 'd me . 
 king richard . well , but o'clock ? 
 buckingham . upon the stroke of ten . 
 king richard . well , let it strike . 
 buckingham . whi let it strike ? 
 king richard . becaus that like a jack thou keep'st the 
 stroke 
 betwixt thi beg and my medit . 
 i am not in the give vein to-day . 
 buckingham . may it pleas you to resolv me in my suit . 
 king richard . thou troublest me ; i am not in the vein . 
 exeunt all but buckingham 
 buckingham . and is it thu ? repay he my deep servic 
 with such contempt ? made i him king for thi ? 
 o , let me think on hast , and be gone 
 to brecknock while my fear head is on ! exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter tyrrel 
 
 tyrrel . the tyrann and bloodi act is done , 
 the most arch deed of piteou massacr 
 that ever yet thi land wa guilti of . 
 dighton and forrest , who i did suborn 
 to do thi piec of ruthless butcheri , 
 albeit they were flesh 'd villain , bloodi dog , 
 melt with tender and mild compass , 
 wept like two children in their death ' sad stori . 
 ' o , thu ' quoth dighton 'lay the gentl babes'- 
 'thu , thu , ' quoth forrest 'girdl one anoth 
 within their alabast innoc arm . 
 their lip were four red rose on a stalk , 
 and in their summer beauti kiss 'd each other . 
 a book of prayer on their pillow lay ; 
 which onc , ' quoth forrest 'almost chang 'd my mind ; 
 but , o , the devil'-ther the villain stopp 'd ; 
 when dighton thu told on : 'we smother 
 the most replenish sweet work of natur 
 that from the prime creation e'er she frame . ' 
 henc both are gone with conscienc and remors 
 they could not speak ; and so i left them both , 
 to bear thi tide to the bloodi king . 
 
 enter king richard 
 
 and here he come . all health , my sovereign lord ! 
 king richard . kind tyrrel , am i happi in thi news ? 
 tyrrel . if to have done the thing you gave in charg 
 beget your happi , be happi then , 
 for it is done . 
 king richard . but didst thou see them dead ? 
 tyrrel . i did , my lord . 
 king richard . and buri , gentl tyrrel ? 
 tyrrel . the chaplain of the tower hath buri them ; 
 but where , to say the truth , i do not know . 
 king richard . come to me , tyrrel , soon at after supper , 
 when thou shalt tell the process of their death . 
 meantim , but think how i may do thee good 
 and be inheritor of thi desir . 
 farewel till then . 
 tyrrel . i humbl take my leav . exit 
 king richard . the son of clarenc have i pent up close ; 
 hi daughter meanli have i match 'd in marriag ; 
 the son of edward sleep in abraham 's bosom , 
 and ann my wife hath bid thi world good night . 
 now , for i know the britain richmond aim 
 at young elizabeth , my brother 's daughter , 
 and by that knot look proudli on the crown , 
 to her go i , a jolli thrive wooer . 
 
 enter ratcliff 
 
 ratcliff . my lord ! 
 king richard . good or bad news , that thou com'st in so 
 bluntli ? 
 ratcliff . bad news , my lord : morton is fled to richmond ; 
 and buckingham , back 'd with the hardi welshmen , 
 is in the field , and still hi power increaseth . 
 king richard . eli with richmond troubl me more near 
 than buckingham and hi rash-levi strength . 
 come , i have learn 'd that fear comment 
 is leaden servitor to dull delay ; 
 delay lead impot and snail-pac 'd beggari . 
 then fieri expedit be my wing , 
 jove 's mercuri , and herald for a king ! 
 go , muster men . my counsel is my shield . 
 we must be brief when traitor brave the field . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . befor the palac 
 
 enter old queen margaret 
 
 queen margaret . so now prosper begin to mellow 
 and drop into the rotten mouth of death . 
 here in these confin slili have i lurk 'd 
 to watch the wane of mine enemi . 
 a dire induct am i wit to , 
 and will to franc , hope the consequ 
 will prove as bitter , black , and tragic . 
 withdraw thee , wretch margaret . who come here ? 
 [ retir ] 
 
 enter queen elizabeth and the duchess of york 
 
 queen elizabeth . ah , my poor princ ! ah , my tender 
 babe ! 
 my unblown flower , new-appear sweet ! 
 if yet your gentl soul fli in the air 
 and be not fix 'd in doom perpetu , 
 hover about me with your airi wing 
 and hear your mother 's lament . 
 queen margaret . hover about her ; say that right for right 
 hath dimm 'd your infant morn to age night . 
 duchess . so mani miseri have craz 'd my voic 
 that my woe-weari tongu is still and mute . 
 edward plantagenet , whi art thou dead ? 
 queen margaret . plantagenet doth quit plantagenet , 
 edward for edward pay a die debt . 
 queen elizabeth . wilt thou , o god , fli from such gentl 
 lamb 
 and throw them in the entrail of the wolf ? 
 when didst thou sleep when such a deed wa done ? 
 queen margaret . when holi harri die , and my sweet 
 son . 
 duchess . dead life , blind sight , poor mortal live ghost , 
 woe 's scene , world 's shame , grave 's due by life usurp 'd , 
 brief abstract and record of tediou day , 
 rest thi unrest on england 's law earth , [ sit down ] 
 unlaw made drunk with innoc blood . 
 queen elizabeth . ah , that thou wouldst as soon afford a 
 grave 
 as thou canst yield a melancholi seat ! 
 then would i hide my bone , not rest them here . 
 ah , who hath ani caus to mourn but we ? 
 [ sit down by her ] 
 queen margaret . [ come forward ] if ancient sorrow be 
 most reverend , 
 give mine the benefit of seniori , 
 and let my grief frown on the upper hand . 
 if sorrow can admit societi , [ sit down with them ] 
 tell o'er your woe again by view mine . 
 i had an edward , till a richard kill 'd him ; 
 i had a husband , till a richard kill 'd him : 
 thou hadst an edward , till a richard kill 'd him ; 
 thou hadst a richard , till a richard kill 'd him . 
 duchess . i had a richard too , and thou didst kill him ; 
 i had a rutland too , thou holp'st to kill him . 
 queen margaret . thou hadst a clarenc too , and richard 
 kill 'd him . 
 from forth the kennel of thi womb hath crept 
 a hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death . 
 that dog , that had hi teeth befor hi eye 
 to worri lamb and lap their gentl blood , 
 that foul defac of god 's handiwork , 
 that excel grand tyrant of the earth 
 that reign in gall eye of weep soul , 
 thi womb let loos to chase us to our grave . 
 o upright , just , and true-dispos god , 
 how do i thank thee that thi carnal cur 
 prey on the issu of hi mother 's bodi 
 and make her pew-fellow with other ' moan ! 
 duchess . o harri 's wife , triumph not in my woe ! 
 god wit with me , i have wept for thine . 
 queen margaret . bear with me ; i am hungri for reveng , 
 and now i cloy me with behold it . 
 thi edward he is dead , that kill 'd my edward ; 
 the other edward dead , to quit my edward ; 
 young york he is but boot , becaus both they 
 match 'd not the high perfect of my loss . 
 thi clarenc he is dead that stabb 'd my edward ; 
 and the behold of thi frantic play , 
 th ' adulter hast , river , vaughan , grey , 
 untim smother 'd in their duski grave . 
 richard yet live , hell 's black intelligenc ; 
 onli reserv 'd their factor to buy soul 
 and send them thither . but at hand , at hand , 
 ensu hi piteou and unpiti end . 
 earth gape , hell burn , fiend roar , saint pray , 
 to have him suddenli convey 'd from henc . 
 cancel hi bond of life , dear god , i pray , 
 that i may live and say 'the dog is dead . ' 
 queen elizabeth . o , thou didst prophesi the time would 
 come 
 that i should wish for thee to help me curs 
 that bottl spider , that foul bunch-back 'd toad ! 
 queen margaret . i call 'd thee then vain flourish of my 
 fortun ; 
 i call 'd thee then poor shadow , paint queen , 
 the present of but what i wa , 
 the flatter index of a dire pageant , 
 one heav 'd a-high to be hurl 'd down below , 
 a mother onli mock 'd with two fair babe , 
 a dream of what thou wast , a garish flag 
 to be the aim of everi danger shot , 
 a sign of digniti , a breath , a bubbl , 
 a queen in jest , onli to fill the scene . 
 where is thi husband now ? where be thi brother ? 
 where be thi two son ? wherein dost thou joy ? 
 who sue , and kneel , and say 'god save the queen ' ? 
 where be the bend peer that flatter thee ? 
 where be the throng troop that follow thee ? 
 declin an thi , and see what now thou art : 
 for happi wife , a most distress widow ; 
 for joy mother , one that wail the name ; 
 for one be su 'd to , one that humbl sue ; 
 for queen , a veri caitiff crown 'd with care ; 
 for she that scorn 'd at me , now scorn 'd of me ; 
 for she be fear 'd of all , now fear one ; 
 for she command all , obey 'd of none . 
 thu hath the cours of justic whirl 'd about 
 and left thee but a veri prey to time , 
 have no more but thought of what thou wast 
 to tortur thee the more , be what thou art . 
 thou didst usurp my place , and dost thou not 
 usurp the just proport of my sorrow ? 
 now thi proud neck bear half my burden 'd yoke , 
 from which even here i slip my weari head 
 and leav the burden of it all on thee . 
 farewel , york 's wife , and queen of sad mischanc ; 
 these english woe shall make me smile in franc . 
 queen elizabeth . o thou well skill 'd in curs , stay awhil 
 and teach me how to curs mine enemi ! 
 queen margaret . forbear to sleep the night , and fast the 
 day ; 
 compar dead happi with live woe ; 
 think that thi babe were sweeter than they were , 
 and he that slew them fouler than he is . 
 bett'r thi loss make the bad-caus wors ; 
 revolv thi will teach thee how to curs . 
 queen elizabeth . my word are dull ; o , quicken them 
 with thine ! 
 queen margaret . thi woe will make them sharp and 
 pierc like mine . exit 
 duchess . whi should calam be fun of word ? 
 queen elizabeth . windi attorney to their client woe , 
 airi succeed of intest joy , 
 poor breath orat of miseri , 
 let them have scope ; though what they will impart 
 help noth els , yet do they case the heart . 
 duchess . if so , then be not tongue-ti . go with me , 
 and in the breath of bitter word let 's smother 
 my damn son that thi two sweet son smother 'd . 
 the trumpet sound ; be copiou in exclaim . 
 
 enter king richard and hi train , march with 
 drum and trumpet 
 
 king richard . who intercept me in my expedit ? 
 duchess . o , she that might have intercept thee , 
 by strangl thee in her accurs womb , 
 from all the slaughter , wretch , that thou hast done ! 
 queen elizabeth . hidest thou that forehead with a golden 
 crown 
 where't should be brand , if that right were right , 
 the slaughter of the princ that ow 'd that crown , 
 and the dire death of my poor son and brother ? 
 tell me , thou villain slave , where are my children ? 
 duchess . thou toad , thou toad , where is thi brother 
 clarenc ? 
 and littl ned plantagenet , hi son ? 
 queen elizabeth . where is the gentl river , vaughan , 
 grey ? 
 duchess . where is kind hast ? 
 king richard . a flourish , trumpet ! strike alarum , drum ! 
 let not the heaven hear these tell-tal women 
 rail on the lord 's anoint . strike , i say ! 
 [ flourish . alarum ] 
 either be patient and entreat me fair , 
 or with the clamor report of war 
 thu will i drown your exclam . 
 duchess . art thou my son ? 
 king richard . ay , i thank god , my father , and yourself . 
 duchess . then patient hear my impati . 
 king richard . madam , i have a touch of your condit 
 that can not brook the accent of reproof . 
 duchess . o , let me speak ! 
 king richard . do , then ; but i 'll not hear . 
 duchess . i will be mild and gentl in my word . 
 king richard . and brief , good mother ; for i am in hast . 
 duchess . art thou so hasti ? i have stay 'd for thee , 
 god know , in torment and in agoni . 
 king richard . and came i not at last to comfort you ? 
 duchess . no , by the holi rood , thou know'st it well 
 thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell . 
 a grievou burden wa thi birth to me ; 
 tetchi and wayward wa thi infanc ; 
 thi school-day fright , desp'rat , wild , and furiou ; 
 thi prime of manhood dare , bold , and ventur ; 
 thi age confirm 'd , proud , subtl , sli , and bloodi , 
 more mild , but yet more harmful-kind in hatr . 
 what comfort hour canst thou name 
 that ever grac 'd me with thi compani ? 
 king richard . faith , none but humphrey hour , that call 'd 
 your grace 
 to breakfast onc forth of my compani . 
 if i be so disgraci in your eye , 
 let me march on and not offend you , madam . 
 strike up the drum . 
 duchess . i prithe hear me speak . 
 king richard . you speak too bitterli . 
 duchess . hear me a word ; 
 for i shall never speak to thee again . 
 king richard . so . 
 duchess . either thou wilt die by god 's just ordin 
 ere from thi war thou turn a conqueror ; 
 or i with grief and extrem age shall perish 
 and never more behold thi face again . 
 therefor take with thee my most grievou curs , 
 which in the day of battl tire thee more 
 than all the complet armour that thou wear'st ! 
 my prayer on the advers parti fight ; 
 and there the littl soul of edward 's children 
 whisper the spirit of thine enemi 
 and promis them success and victori . 
 bloodi thou art ; bloodi will be thi end . 
 shame serv thi life and doth thi death attend . exit 
 queen elizabeth . though far more caus , yet much less 
 spirit to curs 
 abid in me ; i say amen to her . 
 king richard . stay , madam , i must talk a word with you . 
 queen elizabeth . i have no moe son of the royal blood 
 for thee to slaughter . for my daughter , richard , 
 they shall be pray nun , not weep queen ; 
 and therefor level not to hit their live . 
 king richard . you have a daughter call 'd elizabeth . 
 virtuou and fair , royal and graciou . 
 queen elizabeth . and must she die for thi ? o , let her 
 live , 
 and i 'll corrupt her manner , stain her beauti , 
 slander myself as fals to edward 's bed , 
 throw over her the veil of infami ; 
 so she may live unscarr 'd of bleed slaughter , 
 i will confess she wa not edward 's daughter . 
 king richard . wrong not her birth ; she is a royal 
 princess . 
 queen elizabeth . to save her life i 'll say she is not so . 
 king richard . her life is safest onli in her birth . 
 queen elizabeth . and onli in that safeti die her 
 brother . 
 king richard . lo , at their birth good star were opposit . 
 queen elizabeth . no , to their live ill friend were 
 contrari . 
 king richard . all unavoid is the doom of destini . 
 queen elizabeth . true , when avoid grace make destini . 
 my babe were destin 'd to a fairer death , 
 if grace had bless 'd thee with a fairer life . 
 king richard . you speak as if that i had slain my cousin . 
 queen elizabeth . cousin , inde ; and by their uncl 
 cozen 'd 
 of comfort , kingdom , kindr , freedom , life . 
 whose hand soever lanc 'd their tender heart , 
 thi head , an indirectli , gave direct . 
 no doubt the murd'rou knife wa dull and blunt 
 till it wa whet on thi stone-hard heart 
 to revel in the entrail of my lamb . 
 but that stiff use of grief make wild grief tame , 
 my tongu should to thi ear not name my boy 
 till that my nail were anchor 'd in thine eye ; 
 and i , in such a desp'rat bay of death , 
 like a poor bark , of sail and tackl reft , 
 rush all to piec on thi rocki bosom . 
 king richard . madam , so thrive i in my enterpris 
 and danger success of bloodi war , 
 as i intend more good to you and your 
 than ever you or your by me were harm 'd ! 
 queen elizabeth . what good is cover 'd with the face of 
 heaven , 
 to be discov 'd , that can do me good ? 
 king richard . advanc of your children , gentl 
 ladi . 
 queen elizabeth . up to some scaffold , there to lose their 
 head ? 
 king richard . unto the digniti and height of fortun , 
 the high imperi type of thi earth 's glori . 
 queen elizabeth . flatter my sorrow with report of it ; 
 tell me what state , what digniti , what honour , 
 canst thou demis to ani child of mine ? 
 king richard . even all i have-ay , and myself and all 
 will i withal endow a child of thine ; 
 so in the leth of thi angri soul 
 thou drown the sad remembr of those wrong 
 which thou supposest i have done to thee . 
 queen elizabeth . be brief , lest that the process of thi 
 kind 
 last longer tell than thi kind ' date . 
 king richard . then know , that from my soul i love thi 
 daughter . 
 queen elizabeth . my daughter 's mother think it with her 
 soul . 
 king richard . what do you think ? 
 queen elizabeth . that thou dost love my daughter from 
 thi soul . 
 so from thi soul 's love didst thou love her brother , 
 and from my heart 's love i do thank thee for it . 
 king richard . be not so hasti to confound my mean . 
 i mean that with my soul i love thi daughter 
 and do intend to make her queen of england . 
 queen elizabeth . well , then , who dost thou mean shall be 
 her king ? 
 king richard . even he that make her queen . who els 
 should be ? 
 queen elizabeth . what , thou ? 
 king richard . even so . how think you of it ? 
 queen elizabeth . how canst thou woo her ? 
 king richard . that would i learn of you , 
 as one be best acquaint with her humour . 
 queen elizabeth . and wilt thou learn of me ? 
 king richard . madam , with all my heart . 
 queen elizabeth . send to her , by the man that slew her 
 brother , 
 a pair of bleed heart ; thereon engrav 
 'edward ' and 'york . ' then hapli will she weep ; 
 therefor present to her-a sometim margaret 
 did to thi father , steep 'd in rutland 's blood- 
 a handkerchief ; which , say to her , did drain 
 the purpl sap from her sweet brother 's bodi , 
 and bid her wipe her weep eye withal . 
 if thi induc move her not to love , 
 send her a letter of thi nobl deed ; 
 tell her thou mad'st away her uncl clarenc , 
 her uncl river ; ay , and for her sake 
 mad'st quick convey with her good aunt ann . 
 king richard . you mock me , madam ; thi is not the way 
 to win your daughter . 
 queen elizabeth . there is no other way ; 
 unless thou couldst put on some other shape 
 and not be richard that hath done all thi . 
 king richard . say that i did all thi for love of her . 
 queen elizabeth . nay , then inde she can not choos but 
 hate thee , 
 have bought love with such a bloodi spoil . 
 king richard . look what is done can not be now amend . 
 men shall deal unadvisedli sometim , 
 which after-hour give leisur to repent . 
 if i did take the kingdom from your son , 
 to make amend i 'll give it to your daughter . 
 if i have kill 'd the issu of your womb , 
 to quicken your increas i will beget 
 mine issu of your blood upon your daughter . 
 a grandam 's name is littl less in love 
 than is the doat titl of a mother ; 
 they are as children but one step below , 
 even of your metal , of your veri blood ; 
 of all one pain , save for a night of groan 
 endur 'd of her , for whom you bid like sorrow . 
 your children were vexat to your youth ; 
 but mine shall be a comfort to your age . 
 the loss you have is but a son be king , 
 and by that loss your daughter is made queen . 
 i can not make you what amend i would , 
 therefor accept such kind as i can . 
 dorset your son , that with a fear soul 
 lead discont step in foreign soil , 
 thi fair allianc quickli shall can home 
 to high promot and great digniti . 
 the king , that call your beauteou daughter wife , 
 familiarli shall call thi dorset brother ; 
 again shall you be mother to a king , 
 and all the ruin of distress time 
 repair 'd with doubl rich of content . 
 what ! we have mani goodli day to see . 
 the liquid drop of tear that you have shed 
 shall come again , transform 'd to orient pearl , 
 advantag their loan with interest 
 of ten time doubl gain of happi . 
 go , then , my mother , to thi daughter go ; 
 make bold her bash year with your experi ; 
 prepar her ear to hear a wooer 's tale ; 
 put in her tender heart th ' aspir flame 
 of golden sovereignti ; acquaint the princ 
 with the sweet silent hour of marriag joy . 
 and when thi arm of mine hath chastis 
 the petti rebel , dull-brain 'd buckingham , 
 bound with triumphant garland will i come , 
 and lead thi daughter to a conqueror 's bed ; 
 to whom i will retail my conquest won , 
 and she shall be sole victoress , caesar 's caesar . 
 queen elizabeth . what were i best to say ? her father 's 
 brother 
 would be her lord ? or shall i say her uncl ? 
 or he that slew her brother and her uncl ? 
 under what titl shall i woo for thee 
 that god , the law , my honour , and her love 
 can make seem pleas to her tender year ? 
 king richard . infer fair england 's peac by thi allianc . 
 queen elizabeth . which she shall purchas with 
 still-last war . 
 king richard . tell her the king , that may command , 
 entreat . 
 queen elizabeth . that at her hand which the king 's 
 king forbid . 
 king richard . say she shall be a high and mighti queen . 
 queen elizabeth . to wail the titl , as her mother doth . 
 king richard . say i will love her everlastingli . 
 queen elizabeth . but how long shall that titl 'ever ' last ? 
 king richard . sweetli in forc unto her fair life 's end . 
 queen elizabeth . but how long fairli shall her sweet life 
 last ? 
 king richard . as long as heaven and natur lengthen it . 
 queen elizabeth . as long as hell and richard like of it . 
 king richard . say i , her sovereign , am her subject low . 
 queen elizabeth . but she , your subject , loath such 
 sovereignti . 
 king richard . be eloqu in my behalf to her . 
 queen elizabeth . an honest tale speed best be plainli 
 told . 
 king richard . then plainli to her tell my love tale . 
 queen elizabeth . plain and not honest is too harsh a style . 
 king richard . your reason are too shallow and too quick . 
 queen elizabeth . o , no , my reason are too deep and 
 dead- 
 too deep and dead , poor infant , in their grave . 
 king richard . harp not on that string , madam ; that is past . 
 queen elizabeth . harp on it still shall i till heartstr 
 break . 
 king richard . now , by my georg , my garter , and my 
 crown- 
 queen elizabeth . profan 'd , dishonour 'd , and the third 
 usurp 'd . 
 king richard . i swear- 
 queen elizabeth . by noth ; for thi is no oath : 
 thi georg , profan 'd , hath lost hi lordli honour ; 
 thi garter , blemish 'd , pawn 'd hi knightli virtu ; 
 thi crown , usurp 'd , disgrac 'd hi kingli glori . 
 if someth thou wouldst swear to be believ 'd , 
 swear then by someth that thou hast not wrong 'd . 
 king richard . then , by my self- 
 queen elizabeth . thi self is self-misu 'd . 
 king richard . now , by the world- 
 queen elizabeth . 't is full of thi foul wrong . 
 king richard . my father 's death- 
 queen elizabeth . thi life hath it dishonour 'd . 
 king richard . whi , then , by god- 
 queen elizabeth . god 's wrong is most of all . 
 if thou didst fear to break an oath with him , 
 the uniti the king my husband made 
 thou hadst not broken , nor my brother die . 
 if thou hadst fear 'd to break an oath by him , 
 th ' imperi metal , circl now thi head , 
 had grac 'd the tender templ of my child ; 
 and both the princ had been breath here , 
 which now , two tender bedfellow for dust , 
 thi broken faith hath made the prey for worm . 
 what canst thou swear by now ? 
 king richard . the time to come . 
 queen elizabeth . that thou hast wrong in the time 
 o'erpast ; 
 for i myself have mani tear to wash 
 hereaft time , for time past wrong 'd by thee . 
 the children live whose father thou hast slaughter 'd , 
 ungovern 'd youth , to wail it in their age ; 
 the parent live whose children thou hast butche , 
 old barren plant , to wail it with their age . 
 swear not by time to come ; for that thou hast 
 misu 'd ere us 'd , by time ill-u 'd o'erpast . 
 king richard . as i intend to prosper and repent , 
 so thrive i in my danger affair 
 of hostil arm ! myself myself confound ! 
 heaven and fortun bar me happi hour ! 
 day , yield me not thi light ; nor , night , thi rest ! 
 be opposit all planet of good luck 
 to my proceed ! -if , with dear heart 's love , 
 immacul devot , holi thought , 
 i tender not thi beauteou princ daughter . 
 in her consist my happi and thine ; 
 without her , follow to myself and thee , 
 herself , the land , and mani a christian soul , 
 death , desol , ruin , and decay . 
 it can not be avoid but by thi ; 
 it will not be avoid but by thi . 
 therefor , dear mother-i must call you so- 
 be the attorney of my love to her ; 
 plead what i will be , not what i have been ; 
 not my desert , but what i will deserv . 
 urg the necess and state of time , 
 and be not peevish-fond in great design . 
 queen elizabeth . shall i be tempt of the devil thu ? 
 king richard . ay , if the devil tempt you to do good . 
 queen elizabeth . shall i forget myself to be myself ? 
 king richard . ay , if your self 's remembr wrong 
 yourself . 
 queen elizabeth . yet thou didst kill my children . 
 king richard . but in your daughter 's womb i buri them ; 
 where , in that nest of spiceri , they will breed 
 selv of themselv , to your recomfortur . 
 queen elizabeth . shall i go win my daughter to thi will ? 
 king richard . and be a happi mother by the deed . 
 queen elizabeth . i go . write to me veri shortli , 
 and you shall understand from me her mind . 
 king richard . bear her my true love 's kiss ; and so , farewel . 
 kiss her . exit queen elizabeth 
 relent fool , and shallow , chang woman ! 
 
 enter ratcliff ; catesbi follow 
 
 how now ! what news ? 
 ratcliff . most mighti sovereign , on the western coast 
 rideth a puissant navi ; to our shore 
 throng mani doubt hollow-heart friend , 
 unarm 'd , and unresolv 'd to beat them back . 
 't is thought that richmond is their admir ; 
 and there they hull , expect but the aid 
 of buckingham to welcom them ashor . 
 king richard . some light-foot friend post to the duke of 
 norfolk . 
 ratcliff , thyself-or catesbi ; where is he ? 
 catesbi . here , my good lord . 
 king richard . catesbi , fli to the duke . 
 catesbi . i will my lord , with all conveni hast . 
 king richard . ratcliff , come hither . post to salisburi ; 
 when thou com'st thither- [ to catesbi ] dull , 
 unmindful villain , 
 whi stay'st thou here , and go'st not to the duke ? 
 catesbi . first , mighti lieg , tell me your high ' pleasur , 
 what from your grace i shall deliv to him . 
 king richard . o , true , good catesbi . bid him levi straight 
 the greatest strength and power that he can make 
 and meet me suddenli at salisburi . 
 catesbi . i go . exit 
 ratcliff . what , may it pleas you , shall i do at salisburi ? 
 king richard . whi , what wouldst thou do there befor i 
 go ? 
 ratcliff . your high told me i should post befor . 
 king richard . my mind is chang 'd . 
 
 enter lord stanley 
 
 stanley , what news with you ? 
 stanley . none good , my lieg , to pleas you with 
 the hear ; 
 nor none so bad but well may be report . 
 king richard . hoyday , a riddl ! neither good nor bad ! 
 what need'st thou run so mani mile about , 
 when thou mayest tell thi tale the nearest way ? 
 onc more , what news ? 
 stanley . richmond is on the sea . 
 king richard . there let him sink , and be the sea on him ! 
 white-liv 'd runag , what doth he there ? 
 stanley . i know not , mighti sovereign , but by guess . 
 king richard . well , as you guess ? 
 stanley . stirr 'd up by dorset , buckingham , and morton , 
 he make for england here to claim the crown . 
 king richard . is the chair empti ? is the sword unsway 'd ? 
 is the king dead , the empir unpossess 'd ? 
 what heir of york is there aliv but we ? 
 and who is england 's king but great york 's heir ? 
 then tell me what make he upon the sea . 
 stanley . unless for that , my lieg , i can not guess . 
 king richard . unless for that he come to be your lieg , 
 you can not guess wherefor the welshman come . 
 thou wilt revolt and fli to him , i fear . 
 stanley . no , my good lord ; therefor mistrust me not . 
 king richard . where is thi power then , to beat him back ? 
 where be thi tenant and thi follow ? 
 are they not now upon the western shore , 
 safe-conduct the rebel from their ship ? 
 stanley . no , my good lord , my friend are in the north . 
 king richard . cold friend to me . what do they in the 
 north , 
 when they should serv their sovereign in the west ? 
 stanley . they have not been command , mighti king . 
 pleaseth your majesti to give me leav , 
 i 'll muster up my friend and meet your grace 
 where and what time your majesti shall pleas . 
 king richard . ay , ay , thou wouldst be gone to join with 
 richmond ; 
 but i 'll not trust thee . 
 stanley . most mighti sovereign , 
 you have no caus to hold my friendship doubt . 
 i never wa nor never will be fals . 
 king richard . go , then , and muster men . but leav behind 
 your son , georg stanley . look your heart be firm , 
 or els hi head 's assur is but frail . 
 stanley . so deal with him as i prove true to you . exit 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . my graciou sovereign , now in devonshir , 
 as i by friend am well advertis , 
 sir edward courtney and the haughti prelat , 
 bishop of exet , hi elder brother , 
 with mani moe confeder , are in arm . 
 
 enter anoth messeng 
 
 second messeng . in kent , my lieg , the guilford are in 
 arm ; 
 and everi hour more competitor 
 flock to the rebel , and their power grow strong . 
 
 enter anoth messeng 
 
 third messeng . my lord , the armi of great buckingham- 
 king richard . out on you , owl ! noth but song of 
 death ? [ he strike him ] 
 there , take thou that till thou bring better news . 
 third messeng . the news i have to tell your majesti 
 is that by sudden flood and fall of water 
 buckingham 's armi is disper 'd and scatter 'd ; 
 and he himself wand'r away alon , 
 no man know whither . 
 king richard . i cri thee merci . 
 there is my purs to cure that blow of thine . 
 hath ani well-advis friend proclaim 'd 
 reward to him that bring the traitor in ? 
 third messeng . such proclam hath been made , 
 my lord . 
 
 enter anoth messeng 
 
 fourth messeng . sir thoma lovel and lord marqui 
 dorset , 
 't is said , my lieg , in yorkshir are in arm . 
 but thi good comfort bring i to your highness- 
 the britain navi is disper 'd by tempest . 
 richmond in dorsetshir sent out a boat 
 unto the shore , to ask those on the bank 
 if they were hi assist , yea or no ; 
 who answer 'd him they came from buckingham 
 upon hi parti . he , mistrust them , 
 hoi 'd sail , and made hi cours again for britain . 
 king richard . march on , march on , sinc we are up in 
 arm ; 
 if not to fight with foreign enemi , 
 yet to beat down these rebel here at home . 
 
 re-ent catesbi 
 
 catesbi . my lieg , the duke of buckingham is taken- 
 that is the best news . that the earl of richmond 
 is with a mighti power land at milford 
 is colder tide , yet they must be told . 
 king richard . away toward salisburi ! while we reason 
 here 
 a royal battl might be won and lost . 
 some one take order buckingham be brought 
 to salisburi ; the rest march on with me . 
 flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 lord derbi 's hous 
 
 enter stanley and sir christoph urswick 
 
 stanley . sir christoph , tell richmond thi from me : 
 that in the sti of the most deadli boar 
 my son georg stanley is frank 'd up in hold ; 
 if i revolt , off goe young georg 's head ; 
 the fear of that hold off my present aid . 
 so , get thee gone ; commend me to thi lord . 
 withal say that the queen hath heartili consent 
 he should espous elizabeth her daughter . 
 but tell me , where is princ richmond now ? 
 christoph . at pembrok , or at ha'rford west in wale . 
 stanley . what men of name resort to him ? 
 christoph . sir walter herbert , a renown soldier ; 
 sir gilbert talbot , sir william stanley , 
 oxford , redoubt pembrok , sir jame blunt , 
 and rice ap thoma , with a valiant crew ; 
 and mani other of great name and worth ; 
 and toward london do they bend their power , 
 if by the way they be not fought withal . 
 stanley . well , hie thee to thi lord ; i kiss hi hand ; 
 my letter will resolv him of my mind . 
 farewel . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 salisburi . an open place 
 
 enter the sheriff and guard , with buckingham , led to execut 
 
 buckingham . will not king richard let me speak with 
 him ? 
 sheriff . no , my good lord ; therefor be patient . 
 buckingham . hast , and edward 's children , grey , and 
 river , 
 holi king henri , and thi fair son edward , 
 vaughan , and all that have miscarri 
 by underhand corrupt foul injustic , 
 if that your moodi discont soul 
 do through the cloud behold thi present hour , 
 even for reveng mock my destruct ! 
 thi is all-soul ' day , fellow , is it not ? 
 sheriff . it is , my lord . 
 buckingham . whi , then all-soul ' day is my bodi 's 
 doomsday . 
 thi is the day which in king edward 's time 
 i wish 'd might fall on me when i wa found 
 fals to hi children and hi wife 's alli ; 
 thi is the day wherein i wish 'd to fall 
 by the fals faith of him whom most i trust ; 
 thi , thi all-soul ' day to my fear soul 
 is the determin 'd respit of my wrong ; 
 that high all-seer which i dalli with 
 hath turn 'd my feign prayer on my head 
 and given in earnest what i begg 'd in jest . 
 thu doth he forc the sword of wick men 
 to turn their own point in their master ' bosom . 
 thu margaret 's curs fall heavi on my neck . 
 'when he ' quoth she 'shall split thi heart with sorrow , 
 rememb margaret wa a prophetess . ' 
 come lead me , offic , to the block of shame ; 
 wrong hath but wrong , and blame the due of blame . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 camp near tamworth 
 
 enter richmond , oxford , sir jame blunt , sir walter herbert , and other , 
 with drum and colour 
 
 richmond . fellow in arm , and my most love friend , 
 brui 'd underneath the yoke of tyranni , 
 thu far into the bowel of the land 
 have we march 'd on without impedi ; 
 and here receiv we from our father stanley 
 line of fair comfort and encourag . 
 the wretch , bloodi , and usurp boar , 
 that spoil 'd your summer field and fruit vine , 
 swill your warm blood like wash , and make hi trough 
 in your embowel 'd bosoms-thi foul swine 
 is now even in the centr of thi isl , 
 near to the town of leicest , as we learn . 
 from tamworth thither is but one day 's march . 
 in god 's name cheerli on , courag friend , 
 to reap the harvest of perpetu peac 
 by thi one bloodi trial of sharp war . 
 oxford . everi man 's conscienc is a thousand men , 
 to fight against thi guilti homicid . 
 herbert . i doubt not but hi friend will turn to us . 
 blunt . he hath no friend but what are friend for fear , 
 which in hi dearest need will fli from him . 
 richmond . all for our vantag . then in god 's name march . 
 true hope is swift and fli with swallow 's wing ; 
 king it make god , and meaner creatur king . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 bosworth field 
 
 enter king richard in arm , with norfolk , ratcliff , 
 the earl of surrey and other 
 
 king richard . here pitch our tent , even here in bosworth 
 field . 
 my lord of surrey , whi look you so sad ? 
 surrey . my heart is ten time lighter than my look . 
 king richard . my lord of norfolk ! 
 norfolk . here , most graciou lieg . 
 king richard . norfolk , we must have knock ; ha ! must we 
 not ? 
 norfolk . we must both give and take , my love lord . 
 king richard . up with my tent ! here will i lie to-night ; 
 [ soldier begin to set up the king 's tent ] 
 but where to-morrow ? well , all 's one for that . 
 who hath descri the number of the traitor ? 
 norfolk . six or seven thousand is their utmost power . 
 king richard . whi , our battalia trebl that account ; 
 besid , the king 's name is a tower of strength , 
 which they upon the advers faction want . 
 up with the tent ! come , nobl gentlemen , 
 let us survey the vantag of the ground . 
 call for some men of sound direct . 
 let 's lack no disciplin , make no delay ; 
 for , lord , to-morrow is a busi day . exeunt 
 
 enter , on the other side of the field , 
 richmond , sir william brandon , oxford , dorset , 
 and other . some pitch richmond 's tent 
 
 richmond . the weari sun hath made a golden set , 
 and by the bright tract of hi fieri car 
 give token of a goodli day to-morrow . 
 sir william brandon , you shall bear my standard . 
 give me some ink and paper in my tent . 
 i 'll draw the form and model of our battl , 
 limit each leader to hi sever charg , 
 and part in just proport our small power . 
 my lord of oxford-y , sir william brandon- 
 and you , sir walter herbert-stay with me . 
 the earl of pembrok keep hi regiment ; 
 good captain blunt , bear my good night to him , 
 and by the second hour in the morn 
 desir the earl to see me in my tent . 
 yet one thing more , good captain , do for me- 
 where is lord stanley quarter 'd , do you know ? 
 blunt . unless i have mista'en hi colour much- 
 which well i am assur 'd i have not done- 
 hi regiment lie half a mile at least 
 south from the mighti power of the king . 
 richmond . if without peril it be possibl , 
 sweet blunt , make some good mean to speak with him 
 and give him from me thi most need note . 
 blunt . upon my life , my lord , i 'll undertak it ; 
 and so , god give you quiet rest to-night ! 
 richmond . good night , good captain blunt . come , 
 gentlemen , 
 let us consult upon to-morrow 's busi . 
 in to my tent ; the dew is raw and cold . 
 [ they withdraw into the tent ] 
 
 enter , to his-tent , king richard , norfolk , 
 ratcliff , and catesbi 
 
 king richard . what is't o'clock ? 
 catesbi . it 's supper-tim , my lord ; 
 it 's nine o'clock . 
 king richard . i will not sup to-night . 
 give me some ink and paper . 
 what , is my beaver easier than it wa ? 
 and all my armour laid into my tent ? 
 catesbi . it is , my lieg ; and all thing are in readi . 
 king richard . good norfolk , hie thee to thi charg ; 
 use care watch , choos trusti sentinel . 
 norfolk . i go , my lord . 
 king richard . stir with the lark to-morrow , gentl norfolk . 
 norfolk . i warrant you , my lord . exit 
 king richard . catesbi ! 
 catesbi . my lord ? 
 king richard . send out a pursuivant-at-arm 
 to stanley 's regiment ; bid him bring hi power 
 befor sunris , lest hi son georg fall 
 into the blind cave of etern night . exit catesbi 
 fill me a bowl of wine . give me a watch . 
 saddl white surrey for the field to-morrow . 
 look that my stave be sound , and not too heavi . 
 ratcliff ! 
 ratcliff . my lord ? 
 king richard . saw'st thou the melancholi lord 
 northumberland ? 
 ratcliff . thoma the earl of surrey and himself , 
 much about cock-shut time , from troop to troop 
 went through the armi , cheer up the soldier . 
 king richard . so , i am satisfi . give me a bowl of wine . 
 i have not that alacr of spirit 
 nor cheer of mind that i wa wont to have . 
 set it down . is ink and paper readi ? 
 ratcliff . it is , my lord . 
 king richard . bid my guard watch ; leav me . 
 ratcliff , about the mid of night come to my tent 
 and help to arm me . leav me , i say . 
 exit ratcliff . richard sleep 
 
 enter derbi to richmond in hi tent ; 
 lord attend 
 
 derbi . fortun and victori sit on thi helm ! 
 richmond . all comfort that the dark night can afford 
 be to thi person , nobl father-in-law ! 
 tell me , how fare our love mother ? 
 derbi . i , by attorney , bless thee from thi mother , 
 who pray continu for richmond 's good . 
 so much for that . the silent hour steal on , 
 and flaki dark break within the east . 
 in brief , for so the season bid us be , 
 prepar thi battl earli in the morn , 
 and put thi fortun to the arbitr 
 of bloodi stroke and mortal-star war . 
 i , as i may-that which i would i can not - 
 with best advantag will deceiv the time 
 and aid thee in thi doubt shock of arm ; 
 but on thi side i may not be too forward , 
 lest , be seen , thi brother , tender georg , 
 be execut in hi father 's sight . 
 farewel ; the leisur and the fear time 
 cut off the ceremoni vow of love 
 and ampl interchang of sweet discours 
 which so-long-sund'r friend should dwell upon . 
 god give us leisur for these rite of love ! 
 onc more , adieu ; be valiant , and speed well ! 
 richmond . good lord , conduct him to hi regiment . 
 i 'll strive with troubl thought to take a nap , 
 lest leaden slumber peis me down to-morrow 
 when i should mount with wing of victori . 
 onc more , good night , kind lord and gentlemen . 
 exeunt all but richmond 
 o thou , whose captain i account myself , 
 look on my forc with a graciou eye ; 
 put in their hand thi bruis iron of wrath , 
 that they may crush down with a heavi fall 
 the usurp helmet of our adversari ! 
 make us thi minist of chastis , 
 that we may prais thee in the victori ! 
 to thee i do commend my watch soul 
 ere i let fall the window of mine eye . 
 sleep and wake , o , defend me still ! [ sleep ] 
 
 enter the ghost of young princ edward , 
 son to henri the sixth 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] let me sit heavi on thi soul 
 to-morrow ! 
 think how thou stabb'dst me in my prime of youth 
 at tewksburi ; despair , therefor , and die ! 
 [ to richmond ] be cheer , richmond ; for the wrong 
 soul 
 of butcher 'd princ fight in thi behalf . 
 king henri 's issu , richmond , comfort thee . 
 
 enter the ghost of henri the sixth 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] when i wa mortal , my anoint 
 bodi 
 by thee wa punch full of deadli hole . 
 think on the tower and me . despair , and die . 
 harri the sixth bid thee despair and die . 
 [ to richmond ] virtuou and holi , be thou conqueror ! 
 harri , that prophesi thou shouldst be king , 
 doth comfort thee in thi sleep . live and flourish ! 
 
 enter the ghost of clarenc 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] let me sit heavi in thi soul 
 to-morrow ! i that wa wash 'd to death with fulsom wine , 
 poor clarenc , by thi guil betray 'd to death ! 
 to-morrow in the battl think on me , 
 and fall thi edgeless sword . despair and die ! 
 [ to richmond ] thou offspr of the hous of lancast , 
 the wrong heir of york do pray for thee . 
 good angel guard thi battl ! live and flourish ! 
 
 enter the ghost of river , grey , and vaughan 
 
 ghost of river . [ to richard ] let me sit heavi in thi 
 soul to-morrow , 
 river that die at pomfret ! despair and die ! 
 ghost of grey . [ to richard ] think upon grey , and let 
 thi soul despair ! 
 ghost of vaughan . [ to richard ] think upon vaughan , 
 and with guilti fear 
 let fall thi lanc . despair and die ! 
 all . [ to richmond ] awak , and think our wrong in 
 richard 's bosom 
 will conquer him . awak and win the day . 
 
 enter the ghost of hast 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] bloodi and guilti , guiltili awak , 
 and in a bloodi battl end thi day ! 
 think on lord hast . despair and die . 
 [ to richmond ] quiet untroubl soul , awak , awak ! 
 arm , fight , and conquer , for fair england 's sake ! 
 
 enter the ghost of the two young princ 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] dream on thi cousin smother in 
 the tower . 
 let us be lead within thi bosom , richard , 
 and weigh thee down to ruin , shame , and death ! 
 thi nephew ' soul bid thee despair and die . 
 [ to richmond ] sleep , richmond , sleep in peac , and 
 wake in joy ; 
 good angel guard thee from the boar 's annoy ! 
 live , and beget a happi race of king ! 
 edward 's unhappi son do bid thee flourish . 
 
 enter the ghost of ladi ann , hi wife 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] richard , thi wife , that wretch 
 ann thi wife 
 that never slept a quiet hour with thee 
 now fill thi sleep with perturb . 
 to-morrow in the battl think on me , 
 and fall thi edgeless sword . despair and die . 
 [ to richmond ] thou quiet soul , sleep thou a quiet sleep ; 
 dream of success and happi victori . 
 thi adversari 's wife doth pray for thee . 
 
 enter the ghost of buckingham 
 
 ghost . [ to richard ] the first wa i that help 'd thee 
 to the crown ; 
 the last wa i that felt thi tyranni . 
 o , in the battl think on buckingham , 
 and die in terror of thi guilti ! 
 dream on , dream on of bloodi deed and death ; 
 faint , despair ; despair , yield thi breath ! 
 [ to richmond ] i die for hope ere i could lend thee aid ; 
 but cheer thi heart and be thou not dismay 'd : 
 god and good angel fight on richmond 's side ; 
 and richard fall in height of all hi pride . 
 [ the ghost vanish . richard start out of hi dream ] 
 king richard . give me anoth hors . bind up my wound . 
 have merci , jesu ! soft ! i did but dream . 
 o coward conscienc , how dost thou afflict me ! 
 the light burn blue . it is now dead midnight . 
 cold fear drop stand on my trembl flesh . 
 what do i fear ? myself ? there 's none els by . 
 richard love richard ; that is , i am i . 
 is there a murder here ? no-y , i am . 
 then fli . what , from myself ? great reason why- 
 lest i reveng . what , myself upon myself ! 
 alack , i love myself . wherefor ? for ani good 
 that i myself have done unto myself ? 
 o , no ! ala , i rather hate myself 
 for hate deed commit by myself ! 
 i am a villain ; yet i lie , i am not . 
 fool , of thyself speak well . fool , do not flatter . 
 my conscienc hath a thousand sever tongu , 
 and everi tongu bring in a sever tale , 
 and everi tale condemn me for a villain . 
 perjuri , perjuri , in the high'st degre ; 
 murder , stern murder , in the dir'st degre ; 
 all sever sin , all us 'd in each degre , 
 throng to the bar , cri all 'guilti ! guilti ! ' 
 i shall despair . there is no creatur love me ; 
 and if i die no soul will piti me : 
 and wherefor should they , sinc that i myself 
 find in myself no piti to myself ? 
 methought the soul of all that i had murder 'd 
 came to my tent , and everi one did threat 
 to-morrow 's vengeanc on the head of richard . 
 
 enter ratcliff 
 
 ratcliff . my lord ! 
 king richard . zound , who is there ? 
 ratcliff . ratcliff , my lord ; 't is i. the earli village-cock 
 hath twice done salut to the morn ; 
 your friend are up and buckl on their armour . 
 king richard . o ratcliff , i have dream 'd a fear dream ! 
 what think'st thou-wil our friend prove all true ? 
 ratcliff . no doubt , my lord . 
 king richard . o ratcliff , i fear , i fear . 
 ratcliff . nay , good my lord , be not afraid of shadow . 
 king richard by the apostl paul , shadow to-night 
 have stuck more terror to the soul of richard 
 than can the substanc of ten thousand soldier 
 arm in proof and led by shallow richmond . 
 't is not yet near day . come , go with me ; 
 under our tent i 'll play the eaves-dropp , 
 to see if ani mean to shrink from me . exeunt 
 
 enter the lord to richmond sit in hi tent 
 
 lord . good morrow , richmond ! 
 richmond . cri merci , lord and watch gentlemen , 
 that you have ta'en a tardi sluggard here . 
 lord . how have you slept , my lord ? 
 richmond . the sweetest sleep and fairest-bod dream 
 that ever ent'r in a drowsi head 
 have i sinc your departur had , my lord . 
 methought their soul whose bodi richard murder 'd 
 came to my tent and cri on victori . 
 i promis you my soul is veri jocund 
 in the remembr of so fair a dream . 
 how far into the morn is it , lord ? 
 lord . upon the stroke of four . 
 richmond . whi , then 't is time to arm and give direct . 
 
 hi orat to hi soldier 
 
 more than i have said , love countrymen , 
 the leisur and enforc of the time 
 forbid to dwell upon ; yet rememb thi : 
 god and our good caus fight upon our side ; 
 the prayer of holi saint and wrong soul , 
 like high-rear 'd bulwark , stand befor our face ; 
 richard except , those whom we fight against 
 had rather have us win than him they follow . 
 for what is he they follow ? truli , gentlemen , 
 a bloodi tyrant and a homicid ; 
 one rai 'd in blood , and one in blood establish 'd ; 
 one that made mean to come by what he hath , 
 and slaughter those that were the mean to help him ; 
 a base foul stone , made preciou by the foil 
 of england 's chair , where he is fals set ; 
 one that hath ever been god 's enemi . 
 then if you fight against god 's enemi , 
 god will in justic ward you as hi soldier ; 
 if you do sweat to put a tyrant down , 
 you sleep in peac , the tyrant be slain ; 
 if you do fight against your countri 's foe , 
 your countri 's foe shall pay your pain the hire ; 
 if you do fight in safeguard of your wive , 
 your wive shall welcom home the conqueror ; 
 if you do free your children from the sword , 
 your children 's children quit it in your age . 
 then , in the name of god and all these right , 
 advanc your standard , draw your will sword . 
 for me , the ransom of my bold attempt 
 shall be thi cold corps on the earth 's cold face ; 
 but if i thrive , the gain of my attempt 
 the least of you shall share hi part thereof . 
 sound drum and trumpet boldli and cheer ; 
 god and saint georg ! richmond and victori ! exeunt 
 
 re-ent king richard , ratcliff , attend , 
 and forc 
 
 king richard . what said northumberland as touch 
 richmond ? 
 ratcliff . that he wa never train up in arm . 
 king richard . he said the truth ; and what said surrey 
 then ? 
 ratcliff . he smil 'd , and said 'the better for our purpos . ' 
 king he wa in the right ; and so inde it is . 
 [ clock strike ] 
 tell the clock there . give me a calendar . 
 who saw the sun to-day ? 
 ratcliff . not i , my lord . 
 king richard . then he disdain to shine ; for by the book 
 he should have brav 'd the east an hour ago . 
 a black day will it be to somebodi . 
 ratcliff ! 
 ratcliff . my lord ? 
 king richard . the sun will not be seen to-day ; 
 the sky doth frown and lour upon our armi . 
 i would these dewi tear were from the ground . 
 not shine to-day ! whi , what is that to me 
 more than to richmond ? for the selfsam heaven 
 that frown on me look sadli upon him . 
 
 enter norfolk 
 
 norfolk . arm , arm , my lord ; the foe vaunt in the field . 
 king richard . come , bustl , bustl ; caparison my hors ; 
 call up lord stanley , bid him bring hi power . 
 i will lead forth my soldier to the plain , 
 and thu my battl shall be order : 
 my foreward shall be drawn out all in length , 
 consist equal of hors and foot ; 
 our archer shall be place in the midst . 
 john duke of norfolk , thoma earl of surrey , 
 shall have the lead of thi foot and hors . 
 they thu direct , we will follow 
 in the main battl , whose puissanc on either side 
 shall be well wing with our chiefest hors . 
 thi , and saint georg to boot ! what think'st thou , 
 norfolk ? 
 norfolk . a good direct , warlik sovereign . 
 thi found i on my tent thi morn . 
 [ he sheweth him a paper ] 
 king richard . [ read ] 
 'jockey of norfolk , be not so bold , 
 for dickon thi master is bought and sold . ' 
 a thing devis by the enemi . 
 go , gentlemen , everi man unto hi charg . 
 let not our babbl dream affright our soul ; 
 conscienc is but a word that coward use , 
 devi 'd at first to keep the strong in awe . 
 our strong arm be our conscienc , sword our law . 
 march on , join brave , let us to it pell-mel ; 
 if not to heaven , then hand in hand to hell . 
 
 hi orat to hi armi 
 
 what shall i say more than i have inferr 'd ? 
 rememb whom you are to cope withal- 
 a sort of vagabond , rascal , and runaway , 
 a scum of britain , and base lackey peasant , 
 whom their o'er-cloy countri vomit forth 
 to desper adventur and assur 'd destruct . 
 you sleep safe , they bring to you unrest ; 
 you have land , and bless 'd with beauteou wive , 
 they would restrain the one , distain the other . 
 and who doth lead them but a paltri fellow , 
 long kept in britain at our mother 's cost ? 
 a milk-sop , one that never in hi life 
 felt so much cold as over shoe in snow ? 
 let 's whip these straggler o'er the sea again ; 
 lash henc these over-ween rag of franc , 
 these famish 'd beggar , weari of their live ; 
 who , but for dream on thi fond exploit , 
 for want of mean , poor rat , had hang 'd themselv . 
 if we be conquer , let men conquer us , 
 and not these bastard britain , whom our father 
 have in their own land beaten , bobb 'd , and thump 'd , 
 and , in record , left them the heir of shame . 
 shall these enjoy our land ? lie with our wive , 
 ravish our daughter ? [ drum afar off ] hark ! i hear their 
 drum . 
 fight , gentlemen of england ! fight , bold yeomen ! 
 draw , archer , draw your arrow to the head ! 
 spur your proud hors hard , and ride in blood ; 
 amaz the welkin with your broken stave ! 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 what say lord stanley ? will he bring hi power ? 
 messeng . my lord , he doth deni to come . 
 king richard . off with hi son georg 's head ! 
 norfolk . my lord , the enemi is pass 'd the marsh . 
 after the battl let georg stanley die . 
 king richard . a thousand heart are great within my 
 bosom . 
 advanc our standard , set upon our foe ; 
 our ancient word of courag , fair saint georg , 
 inspir us with the spleen of fieri dragon ! 
 upon them ! victori sit on our helm . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 anoth part of the field 
 
 alarum ; excurs . enter norfolk and forc ; to him catesbi 
 
 catesbi . rescu , my lord of norfolk , rescu , rescu ! 
 the king enact more wonder than a man , 
 dare an opposit to everi danger . 
 hi hors is slain , and all on foot he fight , 
 seek for richmond in the throat of death . 
 rescu , fair lord , or els the day is lost . 
 
 alarum . enter king richard 
 
 king richard . a hors ! a hors ! my kingdom for a hors ! 
 catesbi . withdraw , my lord ! i 'll help you to a hors . 
 king richard . slave , i have set my life upon a cast 
 and i will stand the hazard of the die . 
 i think there be six richmond in the field ; 
 five have i slain to-day instead of him . 
 a hors ! a hors ! my kingdom for a hors ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 anoth part of the field 
 
 alarum . enter richard and richmond ; they fight ; richard is slain . 
 retreat and flourish . enter richmond , derbi bear the crown , 
 with other lord 
 
 richmond . god and your arm be prai 'd , victori friend ; 
 the day is our , the bloodi dog is dead . 
 derbi . courag richmond , well hast thou acquit thee ! 
 lo , here , thi long-usurp royalti 
 from the dead templ of thi bloodi wretch 
 have i pluck 'd off , to grace thi brow withal . 
 wear it , enjoy it , and make much of it . 
 richmond . great god of heaven , say amen to all ! 
 but , tell me is young georg stanley live . 
 derbi . he is , my lord , and safe in leicest town , 
 whither , if it pleas you , we may now withdraw us . 
 richmond . what men of name are slain on either side ? 
 derbi . john duke of norfolk , walter lord ferrer , 
 sir robert brakenburi , and sir william brandon . 
 richmond . inter their bodi as becom their birth . 
 proclaim a pardon to the soldier fled 
 that in submiss will return to us . 
 and then , as we have ta'en the sacrament , 
 we will unit the white rose and the red . 
 smile heaven upon thi fair conjunct , 
 that long have frown 'd upon their emniti ! 
 what traitor hear me , and say not amen ? 
 england hath long been mad , and scarr 'd herself ; 
 the brother blindli shed the brother 's blood , 
 the father rashli slaughter 'd hi own son , 
 the son , compel 'd , been butcher to the sire ; 
 all thi divid york and lancast , 
 divid in their dire divis , 
 o , now let richmond and elizabeth , 
 the true succeed of each royal hous , 
 by god 's fair ordin conjoin togeth ! 
 and let their heir , god , if thi will be so , 
 enrich the time to come with smooth-fac 'd peac , 
 with smile plenti , and fair prosper day ! 
 abat the edg of traitor , graciou lord , 
 that would reduc these bloodi day again 
 and make poor england weep in stream of blood ! 
 let them not live to tast thi land 's increas 
 that would with treason wound thi fair land 's peac ! 
 now civil wound are stopp 'd , peac live again- 
 that she may long live here , god say amen ! exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 the tragedi of romeo and juliet 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 rumour , the present 
 king henri the fourth 
 
 henri , princ of wale , afterward henri 
 princ john of lancast 
 princ humphrey of gloucest 
 thoma , duke of clarenc 
 son of henri iv 
 
 earl of northumberland 
 scroop , archbishop of york 
 lord mowbray 
 lord hast 
 lord bardolph 
 sir john colvil 
 traver and morton , retain of northumberland 
 opposit against king henri iv 
 
 earl of warwick 
 earl of westmoreland 
 earl of surrey 
 earl of kent 
 gower 
 harcourt 
 blunt 
 of the king 's parti 
 
 lord chief justic 
 servant , to lord chief justic 
 
 sir john falstaff 
 edward poin 
 bardolph 
 pistol 
 peto 
 irregular humourist 
 
 page , to falstaff 
 
 robert shallow and silenc , countri justic 
 davi , servant to shallow 
 
 fang and snare , sheriff 's offic 
 
 ralph mouldi 
 simon shadow 
 thoma wart 
 franci feebl 
 peter bullcalf 
 countri soldier 
 
 franci , a drawer 
 
 ladi northumberland 
 ladi perci , perci 's widow 
 hostess quickli , of the boar 's head , eastcheap 
 doll tearsheet 
 
 lord , attend , porter , drawer , beadl , groom , servant , 
 speaker of the epilogu 
 
 scene : england 
 
 induct 
 induct . 
 warkworth . befor northumberland 's castl 
 
 enter rumour , paint full of tongu 
 
 rumour . open your ear ; for which of you will stop 
 the vent of hear when loud rumour speak ? 
 i , from the orient to the droop west , 
 make the wind my post-hors , still unfold 
 the act commenc on thi ball of earth . 
 upon my tongu continu slander ride , 
 the which in everi languag i pronounc , 
 stuf the ear of men with fals report . 
 i speak of peac while covert emniti , 
 under the smile of safeti , wound the world ; 
 and who but rumour , who but onli i , 
 make fear muster and prepar 'd defenc , 
 while the big year , swoln with some other grief , 
 is thought with child by the stern tyrant war , 
 and no such matter ? rumour is a pipe 
 blown by surmis , jealousi , conjectur , 
 and of so easi and so plain a stop 
 that the blunt monster with uncount head , 
 the still-discord wav'r multitud , 
 can play upon it . but what need i thu 
 my well-known bodi to anatom 
 among my household ? whi is rumour here ? 
 i run befor king harri 's victori , 
 who , in a bloodi field by shrewsburi , 
 hath beaten down young hotspur and hi troop , 
 quench the flame of bold rebellion 
 even with the rebel ' blood . but what mean i 
 to speak so true at first ? my offic is 
 to nois abroad that harri monmouth fell 
 under the wrath of nobl hotspur 's sword , 
 and that the king befor the dougla ' rage 
 stoop 'd hi anoint head as low as death . 
 thi have i rumour 'd through the peasant town 
 between that royal field of shrewsburi 
 and thi worm-eaten hold of rag stone , 
 where hotspur 's father , old northumberland , 
 lie crafty-sick . the post come tire on , 
 and not a man of them bring other news 
 than they have learnt of me . from rumour 's tongu 
 they bring smooth comfort fals , wors than true wrong . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 warkworth . befor northumberland 's castl 
 
 enter lord bardolph 
 
 lord bardolph . who keep the gate here , ho ? 
 
 the porter open the gate 
 
 where is the earl ? 
 porter . what shall i say you are ? 
 lord bardolph . tell thou the earl 
 that the lord bardolph doth attend him here . 
 porter . hi lordship is walk 'd forth into the orchard . 
 pleas it your honour knock but at the gate , 
 and he himself will answer . 
 
 enter northumberland 
 
 lord bardolph . here come the earl . exit porter 
 northumberland . what news , lord bardolph ? everi minut now 
 should be the father of some stratagem . 
 the time are wild ; content , like a hors 
 full of high feed , madli hath broke loos 
 and bear down all befor him . 
 lord bardolph . nobl earl , 
 i bring you certain news from shrewsburi . 
 northumberland . good , an god will ! 
 lord bardolph . as good as heart can wish . 
 the king is almost wound to the death ; 
 and , in the fortun of my lord your son , 
 princ harri slain outright ; and both the blunt 
 kill 'd by the hand of dougla ; young princ john , 
 and westmoreland , and stafford , fled the field ; 
 and harri monmouth 's brawn , the hulk sir john , 
 is prison to your son . o , such a day , 
 so fought , so follow , and so fairli won , 
 came not till now to dignifi the time , 
 sinc cxsar 's fortun ! 
 northumberland . how is thi deriv 'd ? 
 saw you the field ? came you from shrewsburi ? 
 lord bardolph . i spake with one , my lord , that came from thenc ; 
 a gentleman well bred and of good name , 
 that freeli rend'r me these news for true . 
 
 enter traver 
 
 northumberland . here come my servant traver , whom i sent 
 on tuesday last to listen after news . 
 lord bardolph . my lord , i over-rod him on the way ; 
 and he is furnish 'd with no certainti 
 more than he hapli may retail from me . 
 northumberland . now , traver , what good tide come with you ? 
 traver . my lord , sir john umfrevil turn 'd me back 
 with joy tide ; and , be better hor 'd , 
 out-rod me . after him came spur hard 
 a gentleman , almost forspent with speed , 
 that stopp 'd by me to breath hi bloodi hors . 
 he ask 'd the way to chester ; and of him 
 i did demand what news from shrewsburi . 
 he told me that rebellion had bad luck , 
 and that young harri perci 's spur wa cold . 
 with that he gave hi abl hors the head 
 and , bend forward , struck hi arm heel 
 against the pant side of hi poor jade 
 up to the rowel-head ; and start so , 
 he seem 'd in run to devour the way , 
 stay no longer question . 
 northumberland . ha ! again : 
 said he young harri perci 's spur wa cold ? 
 of hotspur , coldspur ? that rebellion 
 had met ill luck ? 
 lord bardolph . my lord , i 'll tell you what : 
 if my young lord your son have not the day , 
 upon mine honour , for a silken point 
 i 'll give my baroni . never talk of it . 
 northumberland . whi should that gentleman that rode by traver 
 give then such instanc of loss ? 
 lord bardolph . who- he ? 
 he wa some hild fellow that had stol'n 
 the hors he rode on and , upon my life , 
 spoke at a ventur . look , here come more news . 
 
 enter morton 
 
 northumberland . yea , thi man 's brow , like to a title-leaf , 
 foretel the natur of a tragic volum . 
 so look the strand whereon the imperi flood 
 hath left a wit 'd usurp . 
 say , morton , didst thou come from shrewsburi ? 
 morton . i ran from shrewsburi , my nobl lord ; 
 where hate death put on hi ugliest mask 
 to fright our parti . 
 northumberland . how doth my son and brother ? 
 thou tremblest ; and the white in thi cheek 
 is apter than thi tongu to tell thi errand . 
 even such a man , so faint , so spiritless , 
 so dull , so dread in look , so woe-begon , 
 drew priam 's curtain in the dead of night 
 and would have told him half hi troy wa burnt ; 
 but priam found the fire ere he hi tongu , 
 and i my perci 's death ere thou report'st it . 
 thi thou wouldst say : 'your son did thu and thu ; 
 your brother thu ; so fought the nobl douglas'- 
 stop my greedi ear with their bold deed ; 
 but in the end , to stop my ear inde , 
 thou hast a sigh to blow away thi prais , 
 end with 'brother , son , and all , are dead . ' 
 morton . dougla is live , and your brother , yet ; 
 but for my lord your son- 
 northumberland . whi , he is dead . 
 see what a readi tongu suspicion hath ! 
 he that but fear the thing he would not know 
 hath by instinct knowledg from other ' eye 
 that what he fear 'd is chanc . yet speak , morton ; 
 tell thou an earl hi divin lie , 
 and i will take it as a sweet disgrac 
 and make thee rich for do me such wrong . 
 morton . you are too great to be by me gainsaid ; 
 your spirit is too true , your fear too certain . 
 northumberland . yet , for all thi , say not that perci 's dead . 
 i see a strang confess in thine eye ; 
 thou shak'st thi head , and hold'st it fear or sin 
 to speak a truth . if he be slain , say so : 
 the tongu offend not that report hi death ; 
 and he doth sin that doth beli the dead , 
 not he which say the dead is not aliv . 
 yet the first bringer of unwelcom news 
 hath but a lose offic , and hi tongu 
 sound ever after as a sullen bell , 
 rememb'r toll a depart friend . 
 lord bardolph . i can not think , my lord , your son is dead . 
 morton . i am sorri i should forc you to believ 
 that which i would to god i had not seen ; 
 but these mine eye saw him in bloodi state , 
 rend'r faint quittanc , weari and out-breath 'd , 
 to harri monmouth , whose swift wrath beat down 
 the never-daunt perci to the earth , 
 from whenc with life he never more sprung up . 
 in few , hi death- whose spirit lent a fire 
 even to the dullest peasant in hi camp- 
 be bruit onc , took fire and heat away 
 from the best-temp 'd courag in hi troop ; 
 for from hi metal wa hi parti steel ; 
 which onc in him abat , an the rest 
 turn 'd on themselv , like dull and heavi lead . 
 and as the thing that 's heavi in itself 
 upon enforc fli with greatest speed , 
 so did our men , heavi in hotspur 's loss , 
 lend to thi weight such light with their fear 
 that arrow fled not swifter toward their aim 
 than did our soldier , aim at their safeti , 
 fli from the field . then wa that nobl worcest 
 too soon ta'en prison ; and that furiou scot , 
 the bloodi dougla , whose well-labour sword 
 had three time slain th ' appear of the king , 
 gan vail hi stomach and did grace the shame 
 of those that turn 'd their back , and in hi flight , 
 stumbl in fear , wa took . the sum of all 
 is that the king hath won , and hath sent out 
 a speedi power to encount you , my lord , 
 under the conduct of young lancast 
 and westmoreland . thi is the news at full . 
 northumberland . for thi i shall have time enough to mourn . 
 in poison there is physic ; and these news , 
 have been well , that would have made me sick , 
 be sick , have in some measur made me well ; 
 and as the wretch whose fever-weak'n joint , 
 like strengthless hing , buckl under life , 
 impati of hi fit , break like a fire 
 out of hi keeper 's arm , even so my limb , 
 weak'n with grief , be now enrag 'd with grief , 
 are thrice themselv . henc , therefor , thou nice crutch ! 
 a scali gauntlet now with joint of steel 
 must glove thi hand ; and henc , thou sickli coif ! 
 thou art a guard too wanton for the head 
 which princ , flesh 'd with conquest , aim to hit . 
 now bind my brow with iron ; and approach 
 the ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring 
 to frown upon th ' enrag 'd northumberland ! 
 let heaven kiss earth ! now let not natur 's hand 
 keep the wild flood confin 'd ! let order die ! 
 and let thi world no longer be a stage 
 to feed content in a ling'r act ; 
 but let one spirit of the first-born cain 
 reign in all bosom , that , each heart be set 
 on bloodi cours , the rude scene may end 
 and dark be the burier of the dead ! 
 lord bardolph . thi strain passion doth you wrong , my lord . 
 morton . sweet earl , divorc not wisdom from your honour . 
 the live of all your love complic 
 lean on your health ; the which , if you give o'er 
 to stormi passion , must perforc decay . 
 you cast th ' event of war , my nobl lord , 
 and summ 'd the account of chanc befor you said 
 'let us make head . ' it wa your pre-surmis 
 that in the dole of blow your son might drop . 
 you knew he walk 'd o'er peril on an edg , 
 more like to fall in than to get o'er ; 
 you were advi 'd hi flesh wa capabl 
 of wound and scar , and that hi forward spirit 
 would lift him where most trade of danger rang 'd ; 
 yet did you say 'go forth ' ; and none of thi , 
 though strongli apprehend , could restrain 
 the stiff-born action . what hath then befall'n , 
 or what hath thi bold enterpris brought forth 
 more than that be which wa like to be ? 
 lord bardolph . we all that are engag to thi loss 
 knew that we ventur on such danger sea 
 that if we wrought out life 't wa ten to one ; 
 and yet we ventur 'd , for the gain propo 'd 
 chok 'd the respect of like peril fear 'd ; 
 and sinc we are o'erset , ventur again . 
 come , we will put forth , bodi and good . 
 morton . 't is more than time . and , my most nobl lord , 
 i hear for certain , and dare speak the truth : 
 the gentl archbishop of york is up 
 with well-appoint pow'r . he is a man 
 who with a doubl sureti bind hi follow . 
 my lord your son had onli but the corps , 
 but shadow and the show of men , to fight ; 
 for that same word 'rebellion ' did divid 
 the action of their bodi from their soul ; 
 and they did fight with queasi , constrain 'd , 
 as men drink potion ; that their weapon onli 
 seem 'd on our side , but for their spirit and soul 
 thi word 'rebellion'- it had froze them up , 
 as fish are in a pond . but now the bishop 
 turn insurrect to religion . 
 suppo 'd sincer and holi in hi thought , 
 he 's follow 'd both with bodi and with mind ; 
 and doth enlarg hi rise with the blood 
 of fair king richard , scrap 'd from pomfret stone ; 
 deriv from heaven hi quarrel and hi caus ; 
 tell them he doth bestrid a bleed land , 
 gasp for life under great bolingbrok ; 
 and more and less do flock to follow him . 
 northumberland . i knew of thi befor ; but , to speak truth , 
 thi present grief had wip 'd it from my mind . 
 go in with me ; and counsel everi man 
 the aptest way for safeti and reveng . 
 get post and letter , and make friend with speed- 
 never so few , and never yet more need . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 london . a street 
 
 enter sir john falstaff , with hi page bear hi sword and buckler 
 
 falstaff . sirrah , you giant , what say the doctor to my water ? 
 page . he said , sir , the water itself wa a good healthi water ; but 
 for the parti that owe it , he might have moe diseas than he 
 knew for . 
 falstaff . men of all sort take a pride to gird at me . the brain of 
 thi foolish-compound clay , man , is not abl to invent anyth 
 that intend to laughter , more than i invent or is invent on 
 me . i am not onli witti in myself , but the caus that wit is in 
 other men . i do here walk befor thee like a sow that hath 
 overwhelm 'd all her litter but one . if the princ put thee into 
 my servic for ani other reason than to set me off , whi then i 
 have no judgment . thou whoreson mandrak , thou art fitter to be 
 worn in my cap than to wait at my heel . i wa never mann 'd with 
 an agat till now ; but i will inset you neither in gold nor 
 silver , but in vile apparel , and send you back again to your 
 master , for a jewel- the juven , the princ your master , whose 
 chin is not yet fledg . i will sooner have a beard grow in the 
 palm of my hand than he shall get one off hi cheek ; and yet he 
 will not stick to say hi face is a face-roy . god may finish it 
 when he will , 't is not a hair amiss yet . he may keep it still at 
 a face-roy , for a barber shall never earn sixpenc out of it ; 
 and yet he 'll be crow as if he had writ man ever sinc hi 
 father wa a bachelor . he may keep hi own grace , but he 's almost 
 out of mine , i can assur him . what said master dommelton about 
 the satin for my short cloak and my slop ? 
 page . he said , sir , you should procur him better assur than 
 bardolph . he would not take hi band and your ; he like not the 
 secur . 
 falstaff . let him be damn 'd , like the glutton ; pray god hi tongu 
 be hotter ! a whoreson achitophel ! a rascal-yea-forsooth knave , to 
 bear a gentleman in hand , and then stand upon secur ! the 
 whoreson smooth-pat do now wear noth but high shoe , and 
 bunch of key at their girdl ; and if a man is through with 
 them in honest taking-up , then they must stand upon secur . i 
 had as lief they would put ratsban in my mouth as offer to stop 
 it with secur . i look 'd ' a should have sent me two and twenti 
 yard of satin , as i am a true knight , and he send me secur . 
 well , he may sleep in secur ; for he hath the horn of 
 abund , and the light of hi wife shine through it ; and 
 yet can not he see , though he have hi own lanthorn to light him . 
 where 's bardolph ? 
 page . he 's gone into smithfield to buy your worship hors . 
 falstaff . i bought him in paul 's , and he 'll buy me a hors in 
 smithfield . an i could get me but a wife in the stew , i were 
 mann 'd , hor 'd , and wiv 'd . 
 
 enter the lord chief justic and servant 
 
 page . sir , here come the nobleman that commit the 
 princ for strike him about bardolph . 
 falstaff . wait close ; i will not see him . 
 chief justic . what 's he that goe there ? 
 servant . falstaff , a n't pleas your lordship . 
 chief justic . he that wa in question for the robb'ri ? 
 servant . he , my lord ; but he hath sinc done good servic at 
 shrewsburi , and , as i hear , is now go with some charg to the 
 lord john of lancast . 
 chief justic . what , to york ? call him back again . 
 servant . sir john falstaff ! 
 falstaff . boy , tell him i am deaf . 
 page . you must speak louder ; my master is deaf . 
 chief justic . i am sure he is , to the hear of anyth good . 
 go , pluck him by the elbow ; i must speak with him . 
 servant . sir john ! 
 falstaff . what ! a young knave , and beg ! is there not war ? is 
 there not employ ? doth not the king lack subject ? do not the 
 rebel need soldier ? though it be a shame to be on ani side but 
 one , it is wors shame to beg than to be on the worst side , were 
 it wors than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it . 
 servant . you mistak me , sir . 
 falstaff . whi , sir , did i say you were an honest man ? set my 
 knighthood and my soldiership asid , i had lie in my throat if i 
 had said so . 
 servant . i pray you , sir , then set your knighthood and your 
 soldiership asid ; and give me leav to tell you you in your 
 throat , if you say i am ani other than an honest man . 
 falstaff . i give thee leav to tell me so ! i lay asid that which 
 grow to me ! if thou get'st ani leav of me , hang me ; if thou 
 tak'st leav , thou wert better be hang 'd . you hunt counter . 
 henc ! avaunt ! 
 servant . sir , my lord would speak with you . 
 chief justic . sir john falstaff , a word with you . 
 falstaff . my good lord ! god give your lordship good time of day . i 
 am glad to see your lordship abroad . i heard say your lordship 
 wa sick ; i hope your lordship goe abroad by advic . your 
 lordship , though not clean past your youth , hath yet some smack 
 of age in you , some relish of the salt of time ; and i most 
 humbl beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your 
 health . 
 chief justic . sir john , i sent for you befor your expedit to 
 shrewsburi . 
 falstaff . a n't pleas your lordship , i hear hi majesti is return 'd 
 with some discomfort from wale . 
 chief justic . i talk not of hi majesti . you would not come when i 
 sent for you . 
 falstaff . and i hear , moreov , hi high is fall'n into thi 
 same whoreson apoplexi . 
 chief justic . well god mend him ! i pray you let me speak with you . 
 falstaff . thi apoplexi , as i take it , is a kind of lethargi , a n't 
 pleas your lordship , a kind of sleep in the blood , a whoreson 
 tingl . 
 chief justic . what tell you me of it ? be it as it is . 
 falstaff . it hath it origin from much grief , from studi , and 
 perturb of the brain . i have read the caus of hi effect 
 in galen ; it is a kind of deaf . 
 chief justic . i think you are fall'n into the diseas , for you 
 hear not what i say to you . 
 falstaff . veri well , my lord , veri well . rather a n't pleas you , it 
 is the diseas of not listen , the maladi of not mark , that 
 i am troubl withal . 
 chief justic . to punish you by the heel would amend the attent 
 of your ear ; and i care not if i do becom your physician . 
 falstaff . i am as poor as job , my lord , but not so patient . your 
 lordship may minist the potion of imprison to me in respect 
 of poverti ; but how i should be your patient to follow your 
 prescript , the wise may make some dram of a scrupl , or 
 inde a scrupl itself . 
 chief justic . i sent for you , when there were matter against you 
 for your life , to come speak with me . 
 falstaff . as i wa then advi 'd by my learn counsel in the law 
 of thi land-servic , i did not come . 
 chief justic . well , the truth is , sir john , you live in great 
 infami . 
 falstaff . he that buckl himself in my belt can not live in less . 
 chief justic . your mean are veri slender , and your wast is 
 great . 
 falstaff . i would it were otherwis ; i would my mean were greater 
 and my waist slender . 
 chief justic . you have misl the youth princ . 
 falstaff . the young princ hath misl me . i am the fellow with the 
 great belli , and he my dog . 
 chief justic . well , i am loath to gall a new-heal 'd wound . your 
 day 's servic at shrewsburi hath a littl gild over your 
 night 's exploit on gadshil . you may thank th ' unquiet time for 
 your quiet o'erpost that action . 
 falstaff . my lord- 
 chief justic . but sinc all is well , keep it so : wake not a 
 sleep wolf . 
 falstaff . to wake a wolf is as bad as smell a fox . 
 chief justic . what ! you are as a candl , the better part burnt 
 out . 
 falstaff . a wassail candl , my lord- all tallow ; if i did say of 
 wax , my growth would approv the truth . 
 chief justic . there is not a white hair in your face but should 
 have hi effect of graviti . 
 falstaff . hi effect of gravi , gravi , 
 chief justic . you follow the young princ up and down , like hi 
 ill angel . 
 falstaff . not so , my lord . your ill angel is light ; but hope he 
 that look upon me will take me without weigh . and yet in some 
 respect , i grant , i can not go- i can not tell . virtu is of so 
 littl regard in these costermong ' time that true valour is 
 turn 'd berod ; pregnanc is made a tapster , and hi quick wit 
 wast in give reckon ; all the other gift appertin to 
 man , as the malic of thi age shape them , are not worth a 
 gooseberri . you that are old consid not the capac of us 
 that are young ; you do measur the heat of our liver with the 
 bitter of your gall ; and we that are in the vaward of our 
 youth , must confess , are wag too . 
 chief justic . do you set down your name in the scroll of youth , 
 that are written down old with all the charact of age ? have 
 you not a moist eye , a dri hand , a yellow cheek , a white beard , a 
 decreas leg , an increas belli ? is not your voic broken , 
 your wind short , your chin doubl , your wit singl , and everi 
 part about you blast with antiqu ? and will you yet call 
 yourself young ? fie , fie , fie , sir john ! 
 falstaff . my lord , i wa born about three of the clock in the 
 afternoon , with a white head and someth a round belli . for my 
 voice- i have lost it with halloo and sing of anthem . to 
 approv my youth further , i will not . the truth is , i am onli old 
 in judgment and understand ; and he that will caper with me for 
 a thousand mark , let him lend me the money , and have at him . for 
 the box of the ear that the princ gave you- he gave it like a 
 rude princ , and you took it like a sensibl lord . i have check 'd 
 him for it ; and the young lion repents- marri , not in ash and 
 sackcloth , but in new silk and old sack . 
 chief justic . well , god send the princ a better companion ! 
 falstaff . god send the companion a better princ ! i can not rid my 
 hand of him . 
 chief justic . well , the king hath sever 'd you . i hear you are 
 go with lord john of lancast against the archbishop and the 
 earl of northumberland . 
 falstaff . yea ; i thank your pretti sweet wit for it . but look you 
 pray , all you that kiss my ladi peac at home , that our armi 
 join not in a hot day ; for , by the lord , i take but two shirt 
 out with me , and i mean not to sweat extraordinarili . if it be a 
 hot day , and i brandish anyth but a bottl , i would i might 
 never spit white again . there is not a danger action can peep 
 out hi head but i am thrust upon it . well , i can not last ever ; 
 but it wa alway yet the trick of our english nation , if they 
 have a good thing , to make it too common . if ye will need say i 
 am an old man , you should give me rest . i would to god my name 
 were not so terribl to the enemi as it is . i were better to be 
 eaten to death with a rust than to be scour to noth with 
 perpetu motion . 
 chief justic . well , be honest , be honest ; and god bless your 
 expedit ! 
 falstaff . will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me 
 forth ? 
 chief justic . not a penni , not a penni ; you are too impati to 
 bear cross . fare you well . commend me to my cousin 
 westmoreland . 
 exeunt chief justic and servant 
 falstaff . if i do , fillip me with a three-man beetl . a man can no 
 more separ age and covet than ' a can part young limb 
 and lecheri ; but the gout gall the one , and the pox pinch the 
 other ; and so both the degre prevent my curs . boy ! 
 page . sir ? 
 falstaff . what money is in my purs ? 
 page . seven groat and two penc . 
 falstaff . i can get no remedi against thi consumpt of the 
 purs ; borrow onli linger and linger it out , but the diseas 
 is incur . go bear thi letter to my lord of lancast ; thi 
 to the princ ; thi to the earl of westmoreland ; and thi to old 
 mistress ursula , whom i have weekli sworn to marri sinc i 
 perceiv 'd the first white hair of my chin . about it ; you know 
 where to find me . [ exit page ] a pox of thi gout ! or , a gout of 
 thi pox ! for the one or the other play the rogu with my great 
 toe . 't is no matter if i do halt ; i have the war for my colour , 
 and my pension shall seem the more reason . a good wit will 
 make use of anyth . i will turn diseas to commod . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 york . the archbishop 's palac 
 
 enter the archbishop , thoma mowbray the earl marshal , lord hast , 
 and lord bardolph 
 
 archbishop . thu have you heard our caus and known our mean ; 
 and , my most nobl friend , i pray you all 
 speak plainli your opinion of our hopes- 
 and first , lord marshal , what say you to it ? 
 mowbray . i well allow the occas of our ami ; 
 but gladli would be better satisfi 
 how , in our mean , we should advanc ourselv 
 to look with forehead bold and big enough 
 upon the power and puissanc of the king . 
 hast . our present muster grow upon the file 
 to five and twenti thousand men of choic ; 
 and our suppli live larg in the hope 
 of great northumberland , whose bosom burn 
 with an incens fire of injuri . 
 lord bardolph . the question then , lord hast , standeth thu : 
 whether our present five and twenti thousand 
 may hold up head without northumberland ? 
 hast . with him , we may . 
 lord bardolph . yea , marri , there 's the point ; 
 but if without him we be thought too feebl , 
 my judgment is we should not step too far 
 till we had hi assist by the hand ; 
 for , in a theme so bloody-fac 'd as thi , 
 conjectur , expect , and surmis 
 of aid incertain , should not be admit . 
 archbishop . 't is veri true , lord bardolph ; for inde 
 it wa young hotspur 's case at shrewsburi . 
 lord bardolph . it wa , my lord ; who lin 'd himself with hope , 
 eat the air and promis of suppli , 
 flatt'r himself in project of a power 
 much smaller than the smallest of hi thought ; 
 and so , with great imagin 
 proper to madmen , led hi power to death , 
 and , wink , leapt into destruct . 
 hast . but , by your leav , it never yet did hurt 
 to lay down likelihood and form of hope . 
 lord bardolph . ye , if thi present qualiti of war- 
 inde the instant action , a caus on foot- 
 live so in hope , as in an earli spring 
 we see th ' appear bud ; which to prove fruit 
 hope give not so much warrant , as despair 
 that frost will bite them . when we mean to build , 
 we first survey the plot , then draw the model ; 
 and when we see the figur of the hous , 
 then we must rate the cost of the erect ; 
 which if we find outweigh abil , 
 what do we then but draw anew the model 
 in fewer offic , or at least desist 
 to build at all ? much more , in thi great work- 
 which is almost to pluck a kingdom down 
 and set anoth up- should we survey 
 the plot of situat and the model , 
 consent upon a sure foundat , 
 question surveyor , know our own estat 
 how abl such a work to undergo- 
 to weigh against hi opposit ; or els 
 we fortifi in paper and in figur , 
 use the name of men instead of men ; 
 like one that draw the model of a hous 
 beyond hi power to build it ; who , half through , 
 give o'er and leav hi part-creat cost 
 a nake subject to the weep cloud 
 and wast for churlish winter 's tyranni . 
 hast . grant that our hopes- yet like of fair birth- 
 should be still-born , and that we now possess 'd 
 the utmost man of expect , 
 i think we are so a bodi strong enough , 
 even as we are , to equal with the king . 
 lord bardolph . what , is the king but five and twenti thousand ? 
 hast . to us no more ; nay , not so much , lord bardolph ; 
 for hi divis , as the time do brawl , 
 are in three head : one power against the french , 
 and one against glendow ; perforc a third 
 must take up us . so is the unfirm king 
 in three divid ; and hi coffer sound 
 with hollow poverti and empti . 
 archbishop . that he should draw hi sever strength togeth 
 and come against us in full puissanc 
 need not be dread . 
 hast . if he should do so , 
 he leav hi back unarm 'd , the french and welsh 
 bay at hi heel . never fear that . 
 lord bardolph . who is it like should lead hi forc hither ? 
 hast . the duke of lancast and westmoreland ; 
 against the welsh , himself and harri monmouth ; 
 but who is substitut against the french 
 i have no certain notic . 
 archbishop . let us on , 
 and publish the occas of our arm . 
 the commonwealth is sick of their own choic ; 
 their over-greedi love hath surfeit . 
 an habit giddi and unsur 
 hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart . 
 o thou fond mani , with what loud applaus 
 didst thou beat heaven with bless bolingbrok 
 befor he wa what thou wouldst have him be ! 
 and be now trimm 'd in thine own desir , 
 thou , beastli feeder , art so full of him 
 that thou provok'st thyself to cast him up . 
 so , so , thou common dog , didst thou disgorg 
 thi glutton bosom of the royal richard ; 
 and now thou wouldst eat thi dead vomit up , 
 and howl'st to find it . what trust is in these time ? 
 they that , when richard liv 'd , would have him die 
 are now becom enamour 'd on hi grave . 
 thou that threw'st dust upon hi goodli head , 
 when through proud london he came sigh on 
 after th ' admir heel of bolingbrok , 
 criest now ' o earth , yield us that king again , 
 and take thou thi ! ' o thought of men accur 'd ! 
 past and to come seem best ; thing present , worst . 
 mowbray . shall we go draw our number , and set on ? 
 hast . we are time 's subject , and time bid be gone . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 london . a street 
 
 enter hostess with two offic , fang and snare 
 
 hostess . master fang , have you ent'r the action ? 
 fang . it is ent'r . 
 hostess . where 's your yeoman ? is't a lusti yeoman ? will ' a stand 
 to't ? 
 fang . sirrah , where 's snare ? 
 hostess . o lord , ay ! good master snare . 
 snare . here , here . 
 fang . snare , we must arrest sir john falstaff . 
 hostess . yea , good master snare ; i have ent'r him and all . 
 snare . it may chanc cost some of our live , for he will stab . 
 hostess . ala the day ! take heed of him ; he stabb 'd me in mine own 
 hous , and that most beastli . in good faith , ' a care not what 
 mischief he doe , if hi weapon be out ; he will foin like ani 
 devil ; he will spare neither man , woman , nor child . 
 fang . if i can close with him , i care not for hi thrust . 
 hostess . no , nor i neither ; i 'll be at your elbow . 
 fang . an i but fist him onc ; an ' a come but within my vice ! 
 hostess . i am undon by hi go ; i warrant you , he 's an 
 infinit thing upon my score . good master fang , hold him sure . 
 good master snare , let him not scape . ' a come continuantli to 
 pie-corner- save your manhoods- to buy a saddl ; and he is 
 indit to dinner to the lubber 's head in lumbert street , to 
 master smooth 's the silkman . i pray you , sinc my exion is 
 ent'r , and my case so openli known to the world , let him be 
 brought in to hi answer . a hundr mark is a long one for a poor 
 lone woman to bear ; and i have born , and born , and born ; and 
 have been fubb 'd off , and fubb 'd off , and fubb 'd off , from thi 
 day to that day , that it is a shame to be thought on . there is no 
 honesti in such deal ; unless a woman should be made an ass and 
 a beast , to bear everi knave 's wrong . 
 
 enter sir john falstaff , page , and bardolph 
 
 yonder he come ; and that arrant malmsey-nos knave , bardolph , 
 with him . do your offic , do your offic , master fang and 
 master snare ; do me , do me , do me your offic . 
 falstaff . how now ! whose mare 's dead ? what 's the matter ? 
 fang . sir john , i arrest you at the suit of mistress quickli . 
 falstaff . away , varlet ! draw , bardolph . cut me off the villian 's 
 head . throw the quean in the channel . 
 hostess . throw me in the channel ! i 'll throw thee in the channel . 
 wilt thou ? wilt thou ? thou bastardli rogu ! murder , murder ! ah , 
 thou honeysuckl villain ! wilt thou kill god 's offic and the 
 king 's ? ah , thou honey-se rogu ! thou art a honey-se ; a 
 man-quel and a woman-quel . 
 falstaff . keep them off , bardolph . 
 fang . a rescu ! a rescu ! 
 hostess . good peopl , bring a rescu or two . thou wot , wot thou ! 
 thou wot , wot ta ? do , do , thou rogu ! do , thou hemp-se ! 
 page . away , you scullion ! you rampallian ! you fustilarian ! 
 i 'll tickl your catastroph . 
 
 enter the lord chief justic and hi men 
 
 chief justic . what is the matter ? keep the peac here , ho ! 
 hostess . good my lord , be good to me . i beseech you , stand to me . 
 chief justic . how now , sir john ! what , are you brawl here ? 
 doth thi becom your place , your time , and busi ? 
 you should have been well on your way to york . 
 stand from him , fellow ; wherefor hang'st thou upon him ? 
 hostess . o my most worship lord , a n't pleas your grace , i am a 
 poor widow of eastcheap , and he is arrest at my suit . 
 chief justic . for what sum ? 
 hostess . it is more than for some , my lord ; it is for all- all i 
 have . he hath eaten me out of hous and home ; he hath put all my 
 substanc into that fat belli of hi . but i will have some of it 
 out again , or i will ride thee a night like a mare . 
 falstaff . i think i am as like to ride the mare , if i have ani 
 vantag of ground to get up . 
 chief justic . how come thi , sir john ? fie ! what man of good 
 temper would endur thi tempest of exclam ? are you not 
 asham to enforc a poor widow to so rough a cours to come by 
 her own ? 
 falstaff . what is the gross sum that i owe thee ? 
 hostess . marri , if thou wert an honest man , thyself and the money 
 too . thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet , sit in 
 my dolphin chamber , at the round tabl , by a sea-coal fire , upon 
 wednesday in wheeson week , when the princ broke thi head for 
 like hi father to singing-man of windsor- thou didst swear to 
 me then , as i wa wash thi wound , to marri me and make me my 
 ladi thi wife . canst thou deni it ? did not goodwif keech , the 
 butcher 's wife , come in then and call me gossip quickli ? come 
 in to borrow a mess of vinegar , tell us she had a good dish of 
 prawn , wherebi thou didst desir to eat some , wherebi i told 
 thee they were ill for green wound ? and didst thou not , when she 
 wa gone down stair , desir me to be no more so familiar with 
 such poor peopl , say that ere long they should call me madam ? 
 and didst thou not kiss me , and bid me fetch the thirti 
 shill ? i put thee now to thi book-oath . deni it , if thou 
 canst . 
 falstaff . my lord , thi is a poor mad soul , and she say up and 
 down the town that her eldest son is like you . she hath been in 
 good case , and , the truth is , poverti hath distract her . but 
 for these foolish offic , i beseech you i may have redress 
 against them . 
 chief justic . sir john , sir john , i am well acquaint with your 
 manner of wrench the true caus the fals way . it is not a 
 confid brow , nor the throng of word that come with such more 
 than impud sauci from you , can thrust me from a level 
 consider . you have , as it appear to me , practi 'd upon the 
 easi yield spirit of thi woman , and made her serv your use 
 both in purs and in person . 
 hostess . yea , in truth , my lord . 
 chief justic . pray thee , peac . pay her the debt you owe her , and 
 unpay the villaini you have done with her ; the one you may do 
 with sterl money , and the other with current repent . 
 falstaff . my lord , i will not undergo thi sneap without repli . you 
 call honour bold impud sauci ; if a man will make 
 curtsi and say noth , he is virtuou . no , my lord , my humbl 
 duti rememb'r , i will not be your suitor . i say to you i do 
 desir deliver from these offic , be upon hasti 
 employ in the king 's affair . 
 chief justic . you speak as have power to do wrong ; but answer in 
 th ' effect of your reput , and satisfi the poor woman . 
 falstaff . come hither , hostess . 
 
 enter gower 
 
 chief justic . now , master gower , what news ? 
 gower . the king , my lord , and harri princ of wale 
 are near at hand . the rest the paper tell . [ give a letter ] 
 falstaff . as i am a gentleman ! 
 hostess . faith , you said so befor . 
 falstaff . as i am a gentleman ! come , no more word of it . 
 hostess . by thi heavenli ground i tread on , i must be fain to pawn 
 both my plate and the tapestri of my dining-chamb . 
 falstaff . glass , glass , is the onli drink ; and for thi 
 wall , a pretti slight drolleri , or the stori of the prodig , or 
 the german hunt , in water-work , is worth a thousand of these 
 bed-hang and these fly-bitten tapestri . let it be ten pound , 
 if thou canst . come , and 'twere not for thi humour , there 's not 
 a better wench in england . go , wash thi face , and draw the 
 action . come , thou must not be in thi humour with me ; dost not 
 know me ? come , come , i know thou wast set on to thi . 
 hostess . pray thee , sir john , let it be but twenti nobl ; 
 i ' faith , i am loath to pawn my plate , so god save me , la ! 
 falstaff . let it alon ; i 'll make other shift . you 'll be a fool 
 still . 
 hostess . well , you shall have it , though i pawn my gown . 
 i hope you 'll come to supper . you 'll pay me all togeth ? 
 falstaff . will i live ? [ to bardolph ] go , with her , with her ; hook 
 on , hook on . 
 hostess . will you have doll tearsheet meet you at supper ? 
 falstaff . no more word ; let 's have her . 
 exeunt hostess , bardolph , and offic 
 chief justic . i have heard better news . 
 falstaff . what 's the news , my lord ? 
 chief justic . where lay the king to-night ? 
 gower . at basingstok , my lord . 
 falstaff . i hope , my lord , all 's well . what is the news , my lord ? 
 chief justic . come all hi forc back ? 
 gower . no ; fifteen hundr foot , five hundr hors , 
 are march 'd up to my lord of lancast , 
 against northumberland and the archbishop . 
 falstaff . come the king back from wale , my nobl lord ? 
 chief justic . you shall have letter of me present . 
 come , go along with me , good master gower . 
 falstaff . my lord ! 
 chief justic . what 's the matter ? 
 falstaff . master gower , shall i entreat you with me to dinner ? 
 gower . i must wait upon my good lord here , i thank you , good sir 
 john . 
 chief justic . sir john , you loiter here too long , be you are to 
 take soldier up in counti as you go . 
 falstaff . will you sup with me , master gower ? 
 chief justic . what foolish master taught you these manner , sir 
 john ? 
 falstaff . master gower , if they becom me not , he wa a fool that 
 taught them me . thi is the right fenc grace , my lord ; tap for 
 tap , and so part fair . 
 chief justic . now , the lord lighten thee ! thou art a great fool . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 london . anoth street 
 
 enter princ henri and poin 
 
 princ . befor god , i am exceed weari . 
 poin . is't come to that ? i had thought weari durst not have 
 attach 'd one of so high blood . 
 princ . faith , it doe me ; though it discolour the complexion of 
 my great to acknowledg it . doth it not show vile in me to 
 desir small beer ? 
 poin . whi , a princ should not be so loos studi as to 
 rememb so weak a composit . 
 princ . belik then my appetit wa not-princ got ; for , by my 
 troth , i do now rememb the poor creatur , small beer . but 
 inde these humbl consider make me out of love with my 
 great . what a disgrac is it to me to rememb thi name , or 
 to know thi face to-morrow , or to take note how mani pair of silk 
 stock thou hast- viz. , these , and those that were thi 
 peach-colour 'd ones- or to bear the inventori of thi shirts- as , 
 one for superflu , and anoth for use ! but that the 
 tennis-court-keep know better than i ; for it is a low ebb of 
 linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there ; as thou hast 
 not done a great while , becaus the rest of thi low countri 
 have made a shift to eat up thi holland . and god know whether 
 those that bawl out of the ruin of thi linen shall inherit hi 
 kingdom ; but the midwiv say the children are not in the fault ; 
 whereupon the world increas , and kindr are mightili 
 strengthen . 
 poin . how ill it follow , after you have labour so hard , you 
 should talk so idli ! tell me , how mani good young princ would 
 do so , their father be so sick as your at thi time is ? 
 princ . shall i tell thee one thing , poin ? 
 poin . ye , faith ; and let it be an excel good thing . 
 princ . it shall serv among wit of no higher breed than thine . 
 poin . go to ; i stand the push of your one thing that you will 
 tell . 
 princ . marri , i tell thee it is not meet that i should be sad , now 
 my father is sick ; albeit i could tell to thee- as to one it 
 pleas me , for fault of a better , to call my friend- i could be 
 sad and sad inde too . 
 poin . veri hardli upon such a subject . 
 princ . by thi hand , thou thinkest me as far in the devil 's book 
 as thou and falstaff for obduraci and persist : let the end 
 tri the man . but i tell thee my heart bleed inwardli that my 
 father is so sick ; and keep such vile compani as thou art hath 
 in reason taken from me all ostent of sorrow . 
 poin . the reason ? 
 princ . what wouldst thou think of me if i should weep ? 
 poin . i would think thee a most princ hypocrit . 
 princ . it would be everi man 's thought ; and thou art a bless 
 fellow to think as everi man think . never a man 's thought in the 
 world keep the road-way better than thine . everi man would think 
 me an hypocrit inde . and what accit your most worship 
 thought to think so ? 
 poin . whi , becaus you have been so lewd and so much engraf to 
 falstaff . 
 princ . and to thee . 
 poin . by thi light , i am well spoke on ; i can hear it with mine 
 own ear . the worst that they can say of me is that i am a second 
 brother and that i am a proper fellow of my hand ; and those two 
 thing , i confess , i can not help . by the mass , here come 
 bardolph . 
 
 enter bardolph and page 
 
 princ . and the boy that i gave falstaff . ' a had him from me 
 christian ; and look if the fat villain have not transform 'd him 
 ape . 
 bardolph . god save your grace ! 
 princ . and your , most nobl bardolph ! 
 poin . come , you virtuou ass , you bash fool , must you be 
 blush ? wherefor blush you now ? what a maidenli man-at-arm 
 are you becom ! is't such a matter to get a pottle-pot 's 
 maidenhead ? 
 page . ' a call me e'en now , my lord , through a red lattic , and i 
 could discern no part of hi face from the window . at last i 
 spi hi eye ; and methought he had made two hole in the 
 alewif 's new petticoat , and so peep 'd through . 
 princ . ha not the boy profit ? 
 bardolph . away , you whoreson upright rabbit , away ! 
 page . away , you rascal althaea 's dream , away ! 
 princ . instruct us , boy ; what dream , boy ? 
 page . marri , my lord , althaea dreamt she wa deliv of a 
 firebrand ; and therefor i call him her dream . 
 princ . a crown 's worth of good interpret . there 't is , boy . 
 [ give a crown ] 
 poin . o that thi blossom could be kept from canker ! 
 well , there is sixpenc to preserv thee . 
 bardolph . an you do not make him be hang 'd among you , the gallow 
 shall have wrong . 
 princ . and how doth thi master , bardolph ? 
 bardolph . well , my lord . he heard of your grace 's come to town . 
 there 's a letter for you . 
 poin . deliv 'd with good respect . and how doth the martlema , 
 your master ? 
 bardolph . in bodili health , sir . 
 poin . marri , the immort part need a physician ; but that move 
 not him . though that be sick , it die not . 
 princ . i do allow thi well to be as familiar with me as my dog ; 
 and he hold hi place , for look you how he write . 
 poin . [ read ] 'john falstaff , knight'- everi man must know that 
 as oft as he ha occas to name himself , even like those that 
 are kin to the king ; for they never prick their finger but they 
 say 'there 's some of the king 's blood spilt . ' 'how come that ? ' 
 say he that take upon him not to conceiv . the answer is as 
 readi as a borrow 's cap : ' i am the king 's poor cousin , sir . ' 
 princ . nay , they will be kin to us , or they will fetch it from 
 japhet . but the letter : [ read ] 'sir john falstaff , knight , to 
 the son of the king nearest hi father , harri princ of wale , 
 greet . ' 
 poin . whi , thi is a certif . 
 princ . peac ! [ read ] ' i will imit the honour roman in 
 breviti . '- 
 poin . he sure mean breviti in breath , short-wind . 
 princ . [ read ] ' i commend me to thee , i commend thee , and i 
 leav thee . be not too familiar with poin ; for he misus thi 
 favour so much that he swear thou art to marri hi sister nell . 
 repent at idl time as thou mayst , and so farewel . 
 thine , by yea and no- which is as much as to say as 
 thou usest him- jack falstaff with my familiar , 
 john with my brother and sister , and sir john with 
 all europ . ' 
 poin . my lord , i 'll steep thi letter in sack and make him eat it . 
 princ . that 's to make him eat twenti of hi word . but do you use 
 me thu , ned ? must i marri your sister ? 
 poin . god send the wench no wors fortun ! but i never said so . 
 princ . well , thu we play the fool with the time , and the spirit 
 of the wise sit in the cloud and mock us . is your master here in 
 london ? 
 bardolph . yea , my lord . 
 princ . where sup he ? doth the old boar feed in the old frank ? 
 bardolph . at the old place , my lord , in eastcheap . 
 princ . what compani ? 
 page . ephesian , my lord , of the old church . 
 princ . sup ani women with him ? 
 page . none , my lord , but old mistress quickli and mistress doll 
 tearsheet . 
 princ . what pagan may that be ? 
 page . a proper gentlewoman , sir , and a kinswoman of my master 's . 
 princ . even such kin as the parish heifer are to the town bull . 
 shall we steal upon them , ned , at supper ? 
 poin . i am your shadow , my lord ; i 'll follow you . 
 princ . sirrah , you boy , and bardolph , no word to your master that 
 i am yet come to town . there 's for your silenc . 
 bardolph . i have no tongu , sir . 
 page . and for mine , sir , i will govern it . 
 princ . fare you well ; go . exeunt bardolph and page 
 thi doll tearsheet should be some road . 
 poin . i warrant you , as common as the way between saint alban and 
 london . 
 princ . how might we see falstaff bestow himself to-night in hi 
 true colour , and not ourselv be seen ? 
 poin . put on two leathern jerkin and apron , and wait upon him at 
 hi tabl as drawer . 
 princ . from a god to a bull ? a heavi descens ! it wa jove 's 
 case . from a princ to a prentic ? a low transform ! that 
 shall be mine ; for in everyth the purpos must weigh with the 
 folli . follow me , ned . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 warkworth . befor the castl 
 
 enter northumberland , ladi northumberland , and ladi perci 
 
 northumberland . i pray thee , love wife , and gentl daughter , 
 give even way unto my rough affair ; 
 put not you on the visag of the time 
 and be , like them , to perci troublesom . 
 ladi northumberland . i have given over , i will speak no more . 
 do what you will ; your wisdom be your guid . 
 northumberland . ala , sweet wife , my honour is at pawn ; 
 and but my go noth can redeem it . 
 ladi perci . o , yet , for god 's sake , go not to these war ! 
 the time wa , father , that you broke your word , 
 when you were more endear 'd to it than now ; 
 when your own perci , when my heart 's dear harri , 
 threw mani a northward look to see hi father 
 bring up hi power ; but he did long in vain . 
 who then persuad you to stay at home ? 
 there were two honour lost , your and your son 's . 
 for your , the god of heaven brighten it ! 
 for hi , it stuck upon him as the sun 
 in the grey vault of heaven ; and by hi light 
 did all the chivalri of england move 
 to do brave act . he wa inde the glass 
 wherein the nobl youth did dress themselv . 
 he had no leg that practi 'd not hi gait ; 
 and speak thick , which natur made hi blemish , 
 becam the accent of the valiant ; 
 for those who could speak low and tardili 
 would turn their own perfect to abus 
 to seem like him : so that in speech , in gait , 
 in diet , in affect of delight , 
 in militari rule , humour of blood , 
 he wa the mark and glass , copi and book , 
 that fashion 'd other . and him- o wondrou him ! 
 o miracl of men ! - him did you leave- 
 second to none , unsecond by you- 
 to look upon the hideou god of war 
 in disadvantag , to abid a field 
 where noth but the sound of hotspur 's name 
 did seem defens . so you left him . 
 never , o never , do hi ghost the wrong 
 to hold your honour more precis and nice 
 with other than with him ! let them alon . 
 the marshal and the archbishop are strong . 
 had my sweet harri had but half their number , 
 to-day might i , hang on hotspur 's neck , 
 have talk 'd of monmouth 's grave . 
 northumberland . beshrew your heart , 
 fair daughter , you do draw my spirit from me 
 with new lament ancient oversight . 
 but i must go and meet with danger there , 
 or it will seek me in anoth place , 
 and find me wors provid . 
 ladi northumberland . o , fli to scotland 
 till that the nobl and the arm common 
 have of their puissanc made a littl tast . 
 ladi perci . if they get ground and vantag of the king , 
 then join you with them , like a rib of steel , 
 to make strength stronger ; but , for all our love , 
 first let them tri themselv . so did your son ; 
 he wa so suff'r ; so came i a widow ; 
 and never shall have length of life enough 
 to rain upon remembr with mine eye , 
 that it may grow and sprout as high as heaven , 
 for record to my nobl husband . 
 northumberland . come , come , go in with me . 't is with my mind 
 as with the tide swell 'd up unto hi height , 
 that make a still-stand , run neither way . 
 fain would i go to meet the archbishop , 
 but mani thousand reason hold me back . 
 i will resolv for scotland . there am i , 
 till time and vantag crave my compani . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 london . the boar 's head tavern in eastcheap 
 
 enter franci and anoth drawer 
 
 franci . what the devil hast thou brought there-apple-john ? thou 
 knowest sir john can not endur an apple-john . 
 second drawer . mass , thou say'st true . the princ onc set a dish 
 of apple-john befor him , and told him there were five more sir 
 john ; and , put off hi hat , said ' i will now take my leav 
 of these six dri , round , old , wither knight . ' it ang'r him 
 to the heart ; but he hath forgot that . 
 franci . whi , then , cover and set them down ; and see if thou canst 
 find out sneak 's nois ; mistress tearsheet would fain hear some 
 music . 
 
 enter third drawer 
 
 third drawer . dispatch ! the room where they supp 'd is too hot ; 
 they 'll come in straight . 
 franci . sirrah , here will be the princ and master poin anon ; and 
 they will put on two of our jerkin and apron ; and sir john must 
 not know of it . bardolph hath brought word . 
 third drawer . by the mass , here will be old ud ; it will be an 
 excel stratagem . 
 second drawer . i 'll see if i can find out sneak . 
 exeunt second and third drawer 
 
 enter hostess and doll tearsheet 
 
 hostess . i ' faith , sweetheart , methink now you are in an excel 
 good temper . your pulsidg beat as extraordinarili as heart 
 would desir ; and your colour , i warrant you , is as red as ani 
 rose , in good truth , la ! but , i ' faith , you have drunk too much 
 canari ; and that 's a marvel search wine , and it perfum 
 the blood ere one can say 'what 's thi ? ' how do you now ? 
 doll . better than i was- hem . 
 hostess . whi , that 's well said ; a good heart 's worth gold . 
 lo , here come sir john . 
 
 enter falstaff 
 
 falstaff . [ sing ] 'when arthur first in court'- empti the 
 jordan . [ exit franci ] - [ sing ] 'and wa a worthi king'- how 
 now , mistress doll ! 
 hostess . sick of a calm ; yea , good faith . 
 falstaff . so is all her sect ; and they be onc in a calm , they are 
 sick . 
 doll . a pox damn you , you muddi rascal ! is that all the comfort you 
 give me ? 
 falstaff . you make fat rascal , mistress doll . 
 doll . i make them ! gluttoni and diseas make them : i make them 
 not . 
 falstaff . if the cook help to make the gluttoni , you help to make 
 the diseas , doll . we catch of you , doll , we catch of you ; grant 
 that , my poor virtu , grant that . 
 doll . yea , joy , our chain and our jewel . 
 falstaff . 'your brooch , pearl , and ouch . ' for to serv brave 
 is to come halt off ; you know , to come off the breach with hi 
 pike bent brave , and to surgeri brave ; to ventur upon the 
 charg 'd chamber bravely- 
 doll . hang yourself , you muddi conger , hang yourself ! 
 hostess . by my troth , thi is the old fashion ; you two never meet 
 but you fall to some discord . you are both , i ' good truth , as 
 rheumat as two dri toast ; you can not one bear with anoth 's 
 confirm . what the good-year ! one must bear , and that must be 
 you . you are the weaker vessel , as as they say , the emptier 
 vessel . 
 doll . can a weak empti vessel bear such a huge full hogs-head ? 
 there 's a whole merchant 's ventur of bourdeaux stuff in him ; you 
 have not seen a hulk better stuff 'd in the hold . come , i 'll be 
 friend with thee , jack . thou art go to the war ; and whether 
 i shall ever see thee again or no , there is nobodi care . 
 
 re-ent franci 
 
 franci . sir , ancient pistol 's below and would speak with you . 
 doll . hang him , swagger rascal ! let him not come hither ; it is 
 the foul-mouth'dst rogu in england . 
 hostess . if he swagger , let him not come here . no , by my faith ! i 
 must live among my neighbour ; i 'll no swagger . i am in good 
 name and fame with the veri best . shut the door . there come no 
 swagger here ; i have not liv 'd all thi while to have 
 swagger now . shut the door , i pray you . 
 falstaff . dost thou hear , hostess ? 
 hostess . pray ye , pacifi yourself , sir john ; there come no 
 swagger here . 
 falstaff . dost thou hear ? it is mine ancient . 
 hostess . tilly-f , sir john , ne'er tell me ; and your ancient 
 swagg'rer come not in my door . i wa befor master tisick , the 
 debuti , t ' other day ; and , as he said to me- 't wa no longer ago 
 than wednesday last , i ' good faith ! - 'neighbour quickli , ' say 
 he- master dumb , our minist , wa by then- 'neighbour quickli , ' 
 say he 'receiv those that are civil , for ' said he 'you are in 
 an ill name . ' now ' a said so , i can tell whereupon . 'for ' say he 
 'you are an honest woman and well thought on , therefor take heed 
 what guest you receiv . receiv ' say he 'no swagger 
 companion . ' there come none here . you would bless you to hear 
 what he said . no , i 'll no swagg'rer . 
 falstaff . he 's no swagg'rer , hostess ; a tame cheater , i ' faith ; you 
 may stroke him as gentli as a puppi greyhound . he 'll not swagger 
 with a barbari hen , if her feather turn back in ani show of 
 resist . call him up , drawer . 
 exit franci 
 hostess . cheater , call you him ? i will bar no honest man my hous , 
 nor no cheater ; but i do not love swagger , by my troth . i am 
 the wors when one say 'swagger . ' feel , master , how i shake ; 
 look you , i warrant you . 
 doll . so you do , hostess . 
 hostess . do i ? yea , in veri truth , do i , an 'twere an aspen leaf . i 
 can not abid swagg'rer . 
 
 enter pistol , bardolph , and page 
 
 pistol . god save you , sir john ! 
 falstaff . welcom , ancient pistol . here , pistol , i charg you with 
 a cup of sack ; do you discharg upon mine hostess . 
 pistol . i will discharg upon her , sir john , with two bullet . 
 falstaff . she is pistol-proof , sir ; you shall not hardli offend 
 her . 
 hostess . come , i 'll drink no proof nor no bullet . i 'll drink no 
 more than will do me good , for no man 's pleasur , i . 
 pistol . then to you , mistress dorothi ; i will charg you . 
 doll . charg me ! i scorn you , scurvi companion . what ! you poor , 
 base , rascal , cheat , lack-linen mate ! away , you mouldi 
 rogu , away ! i am meat for your master . 
 pistol . i know you , mistress dorothi . 
 doll . away , you cut-purs rascal ! you filthi bung , away ! by thi 
 wine , i 'll thrust my knife in your mouldi chap , an you play the 
 sauci cuttl with me . away , you bottle-al rascal ! you 
 basket-hilt stale juggler , you ! sinc when , i pray you , sir ? 
 god 's light , with two point on your shoulder ? much ! 
 pistol . god let me not live but i will murder your ruff for thi . 
 falstaff . no more , pistol ; i would not have you go off here . 
 discharg yourself of our compani , pistol . 
 hostess . no , good captain pistol ; not here , sweet captain . 
 doll . captain ! thou abomin damn 'd cheater , art thou not asham 
 to be call captain ? an captain were of my mind , they would 
 truncheon you out , for take their name upon you befor you 
 have earn 'd them . you a captain ! you slave , for what ? for tear 
 a poor whore 's ruff in a bawdy-hous ? he a captain ! hang him , 
 rogu ! he live upon mouldi stew 'd prune and dri cake . a 
 captain ! god 's light , these villain will make the word as odiou 
 as the word 'occupi ' ; which wa an excel good word befor it 
 wa ill sort . therefor captain had need look to't . 
 bardolph . pray thee go down , good ancient . 
 falstaff . hark thee hither , mistress doll . 
 pistol . not i ! i tell thee what , corpor bardolph , i could tear 
 her ; i 'll be reveng 'd of her . 
 page . pray thee go down . 
 pistol . i 'll see her damn 'd first ; to pluto 's damn 'd lake , by thi 
 hand , to th ' infern deep , with erebu and tortur vile also . 
 hold hook and line , say i. down , down , dog ! down , faitor ! have 
 we not hiren here ? 
 hostess . good captain peesel , be quiet ; 't is veri late , i ' faith ; i 
 beseek you now , aggrav your choler . 
 pistol . these be good humour , inde ! shall packhors , 
 and hollow pamper 'd jade of asia , 
 which can not go but thirti mile a day , 
 compar with caesar , and with cannib , 
 and troiant greek ? nay , rather damn them with 
 king cerberu ; and let the welkin roar . 
 shall we fall foul for toy ? 
 hostess . by my troth , captain , these are veri bitter word . 
 bardolph . be gone , good ancient ; thi will grow to a brawl anon . 
 pistol . die men like dog ! give crown like pin ! have we not hiren 
 here ? 
 hostess . o ' my word , captain , there 's none such here . what the 
 good-year ! do you think i would deni her ? for god 's sake , be 
 quiet . 
 pistol . then feed and be fat , my fair calipoli . 
 come , give 's some sack . 
 'si fortun me torment sperato me contento . ' 
 fear we broadsid ? no , let the fiend give fire . 
 give me some sack ; and , sweetheart , lie thou there . 
 [ lay down hi sword ] 
 come we to full point here , and are etcetera noth ? 
 falstaff . pistol , i would be quiet . 
 pistol . sweet knight , i kiss thi neaf . what ! we have seen the seven 
 star . 
 doll . for god 's sake thrust him down stair ; i can not endur such a 
 fustian rascal . 
 pistol . thrust him down stair ! know we not galloway nag ? 
 falstaff . quoit him down , bardolph , like a shove-groat shill . 
 nay , an ' a do noth but speak noth , ' a shall be noth 
 here . 
 bardolph . come , get you down stair . 
 pistol . what ! shall we have incis ? shall we imbru ? 
 [ snatch up hi sword ] 
 then death rock me asleep , abridg my dole day ! 
 whi , then , let grievou , ghastli , gape wound 
 untwin the sister three ! come , atropo , i say ! 
 hostess . here 's goodli stuff toward ! 
 falstaff . give me my rapier , boy . 
 doll . i pray thee , jack , i pray thee , do not draw . 
 falstaff . get you down stair . 
 [ draw and drive pistol out ] 
 hostess . here 's a goodli tumult ! i 'll forswear keep hous afor 
 i 'll be in these tirrit and fright . so ; murder , i warrant now . 
 ala , ala ! put up your nake weapon , put up your nake weapon . 
 exeunt pistol and bardolph 
 doll . i pray thee , jack , be quiet ; the rascal 's gone . ah , you 
 whoreson littl valiant villain , you ! 
 hostess . are you not hurt i ' th ' groin ? methought ' a made a shrewd 
 thrust at your belli . 
 
 re-ent bardolph 
 
 falstaff . have you turn 'd him out a door ? 
 bardolph . yea , sir . the rascal 's drunk . you have hurt him , sir , i ' 
 th ' shoulder . 
 falstaff . a rascal ! to brave me ! 
 doll . ah , you sweet littl rogu , you ! ala , poor ape , how thou 
 sweat'st ! come , let me wipe thi face . come on , you whoreson 
 chop . ah , rogu ! i ' faith , i love thee . thou art as valor as 
 hector of troy , worth five of agamemnon , and ten time better 
 than the nine worthi . ah , villain ! 
 falstaff . a rascal slave ! i will toss the rogu in a blanket . 
 doll . do , an thou dar'st for thi heart . an thou dost , i 'll canvass 
 thee between a pair of sheet . 
 
 enter musician 
 
 page . the music is come , sir . 
 falstaff . let them play . play , sir . sit on my knee , don . a rascal 
 brag slave ! the rogu fled from me like quick-silv . 
 doll . i ' faith , and thou follow'dst him like a church . thou 
 whoreson littl tidi bartholomew boar-pig , when wilt thou leav 
 fight a day and foin a night , and begin to patch up thine 
 old bodi for heaven ? 
 
 enter , behind , princ henri and poin disguis as drawer 
 
 falstaff . peac , good doll ! do not speak like a death's-head ; do 
 not bid me rememb mine end . 
 doll . sirrah , what humour 's the princ of ? 
 falstaff . a good shallow young fellow . ' a would have made a good 
 pantler ; ' a would ha ' chipp 'd bread well . 
 doll . they say poin ha a good wit . 
 falstaff . he a good wit ! hang him , baboon ! hi wit 's as thick as 
 tewksburi mustard ; there 's no more conceit in him than is in a 
 mallet . 
 doll . whi doe the princ love him so , then ? 
 falstaff . becaus their leg are both of a big , and ' a play at 
 quoit well , and eat conger and fennel , and drink off candl ' 
 end for flap-dragon , and ride the wild mare with the boy , and 
 jump upon join'd-stool , and swear with a good grace , and wear 
 hi boot veri smooth , like unto the sign of the leg , and breed 
 no bate with tell of discreet stori ; and such other gambol 
 faculti ' a ha , that show a weak mind and an abl bodi , for the 
 which the princ admit him . for the princ himself is such 
 anoth ; the weight of a hair will turn the scale between their 
 avoirdupoi . 
 princ . would not thi nave of a wheel have hi ear cut off ? 
 poin . let 's beat him befor hi whore . 
 princ . look whe'er the wither 'd elder hath not hi poll claw 'd 
 like a parrot . 
 poin . is it not strang that desir should so mani year outliv 
 perform ? 
 falstaff . kiss me , doll . 
 princ . saturn and venu thi year in conjunct ! what say th ' 
 almanac to that ? 
 poin . and look whether the fieri trigon , hi man , be not lisp 
 to hi master 's old tabl , hi note-book , hi counsel-keep . 
 falstaff . thou dost give me flatter buss . 
 doll . by my troth , i kiss thee with a most constant heart . 
 falstaff . i am old , i am old . 
 doll . i love thee better than i love e'er a scurvi young boy of 
 them all . 
 falstaff . what stuff wilt have a kirtl of ? i shall receiv money a 
 thursday . shalt have a cap to-morrow . a merri song , come . ' a 
 grow late ; we 'll to bed . thou't forget me when i am gone . 
 doll . by my troth , thou't set me a-weep , an thou say'st so . 
 prove that ever i dress myself handsom till thi return . well , 
 hearken a ' th ' end . 
 falstaff . some sack , franci . 
 princ & poin . anon , anon , sir . [ advanc ] 
 falstaff . ha ! a bastard son of the king 's ? and art thou not poin 
 hi brother ? 
 princ . whi , thou globe of sin contin , what a life dost thou 
 lead ! 
 falstaff . a better than thou . i am a gentleman : thou art a drawer . 
 princ . veri true , sir , and i come to draw you out by the ear . 
 hostess . o , the lord preserv thi grace ! by my troth , welcom to 
 london . now the lord bless that sweet face of thine . o jesu , are 
 you come from wale ? 
 falstaff . thou whoreson mad compound of majesti , by thi light 
 flesh and corrupt blood , thou art welcom . 
 [ lean hi band upon doll ] 
 doll . how , you fat fool ! i scorn you . 
 poin . my lord , he will drive you out of your reveng and turn all 
 to a merriment , if you take not the heat . 
 princ . you whoreson candle-min , you , how vile did you speak of 
 me even now befor thi honest , virtuou , civil gentlewoman ! 
 hostess . god 's bless of your good heart ! and so she is , by my 
 troth . 
 falstaff . didst thou hear me ? 
 princ . yea ; and you knew me , as you did when you ran away by 
 gadshil . you knew i wa at your back , and spoke it on purpos to 
 tri my patienc . 
 falstaff . no , no , no ; not so ; i did not think thou wast within 
 hear . 
 princ . i shall drive you then to confess the wil abus , and 
 then i know how to handl you . 
 falstaff . no abus , hal , o ' mine honour ; no abus . 
 princ . not- to disprais me , and call me pander , and 
 bread-chipp , and i know not what ! 
 falstaff . no abus , hal . 
 poin . no abus ! 
 falstaff . no abus , ned , i ' th ' world ; honest ned , none . i 
 disprai 'd him befor the wicked- that the wick might not fall 
 in love with thee ; in which do , i have done the part of a 
 care friend and a true subject ; and thi father is to give me 
 thank for it . no abus , hal ; none , ned , none ; no , faith , boy , 
 none . 
 princ . see now , whether pure fear and entir cowardic doth not 
 make thee wrong thi virtuou gentlewoman to close with us ? is 
 she of the wick ? is thine hostess here of the wick ? or is thi 
 boy of the wick ? or honest bardolph , whose zeal burn in hi 
 nose , of the wick ? 
 poin . answer , thou dead elm , answer . 
 falstaff . the fiend hath prick 'd down bardolph irrecover ; and 
 hi face is lucif 's privy-kitchen , where he doth noth but 
 roast malt-worm . for the boy- there is a good angel about him ; 
 but the devil outbid him too . 
 princ . for the women ? 
 falstaff . for one of them- she 's in hell alreadi , and burn poor 
 soul . for th ' other- i owe her money ; and whether she be damn 'd 
 for that , i know not . 
 hostess . no , i warrant you . 
 falstaff . no , i think thou art not ; i think thou art quit for that . 
 marri , there is anoth indict upon thee for suffer flesh 
 to be eaten in thi hous , contrari to the law ; for the which i 
 think thou wilt howl . 
 hostess . all vict'ler do so . what 's a joint of mutton or two in a 
 whole lent ? 
 princ . you , gentlewoman- 
 doll . what say your grace ? 
 falstaff . hi grace say that which hi flesh rebel against . 
 [ knock within ] 
 hostess . who knock so loud at door ? look to th ' door there , 
 franci . 
 
 enter peto 
 
 princ . peto , how now ! what news ? 
 peto . the king your father is at westminst ; 
 and there are twenti weak and weari post 
 come from the north ; and as i came along 
 i met and overtook a dozen captain , 
 bare-head , sweat , knock at the tavern , 
 and ask everi one for sir john falstaff . 
 princ . by heaven , poin , i feel me much to blame 
 so idli to profan the preciou time , 
 when tempest of commot , like the south , 
 born with black vapour , doth begin to melt 
 and drop upon our bare unarm head . 
 give me my sword and cloak . falstaff , good night . 
 
 exeunt princ , poin , peto , and bardolph 
 
 falstaff . now come in the sweetest morsel of the night , and we 
 must henc , and leav it unpick 'd . [ knock within ] more 
 knock at the door ! 
 
 re-ent bardolph 
 
 how now ! what 's the matter ? 
 bardolph . you must away to court , sir , present ; 
 a dozen captain stay at door for you . 
 falstaff . [ to the page ] . pay the musician , sirrah.- farewel , 
 hostess ; farewel , doll . you see , my good wench , how men of 
 merit are sought after ; the undeserv may sleep , when the man of 
 action is call 'd on . farewel , good wench . if i be not sent 
 away post , i will see you again ere i go . 
 doll . i can not speak . if my heart be not readi to burst ! 
 well , sweet jack , have a care of thyself . 
 falstaff . farewel , farewel . 
 exeunt falstaff and bardolph 
 hostess . well , fare thee well . i have known thee these twenty-nin 
 year , come peascod-tim ; but an honest and truer-heart man 
 -well fare thee well . 
 bardolph . [ within ] mistress tearsheet ! 
 hostess . what 's the matter ? 
 bardolph . [ within ] bid mistress tearsheet come to my master . 
 hostess . o , run doll , run , run , good come . [ to bardolph ] she 
 come blubber'd.- yea , will you come , doll ? exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 westminst . the palac 
 
 enter the king in hi nightgown , with a page 
 
 king . go call the earl of surrey and of warwick ; 
 but , ere they come , bid them o'er-read these letter 
 and well consid of them . make good speed . exit page 
 how mani thousand of my poorest subject 
 are at thi hour asleep ! o sleep , o gentl sleep , 
 natur 's soft nurs , how have i frighten thee , 
 that thou no more will weigh my eyelid down , 
 and steep my sens in forget ? 
 whi rather , sleep , liest thou in smoki crib , 
 upon uneasi pallet stretch thee , 
 and hush 'd with buzz night-fli to thi slumber , 
 than in the perfum 'd chamber of the great , 
 under the canopi of costli state , 
 and lull 'd with sound of sweetest melodi ? 
 o thou dull god , whi liest thou with the vile 
 in loathsom bed , and leav'st the kingli couch 
 a watch-cas or a common 'larum-bel ? 
 wilt thou upon the high and giddi mast 
 seal up the ship-boy 's eye , and rock hi brain 
 in cradl of the rude imperi surg , 
 and in the visit of the wind , 
 who take the ruffian billow by the top , 
 curl their monstrou head , and hang them 
 with deaf clamour in the slipperi cloud , 
 that with the hurli death itself awak ? 
 canst thou , o partial sleep , give thi repos 
 to the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude ; 
 and in the calmest and most stillest night , 
 with all applianc and mean to boot , 
 deni it to a king ? then , happi low , lie down ! 
 uneasi lie the head that wear a crown . 
 
 enter warwick and surrey 
 
 warwick . mani good morrow to your majesti ! 
 king . is it good morrow , lord ? 
 warwick . 't is one o'clock , and past . 
 king . whi then , good morrow to you all , my lord . 
 have you read o'er the letter that i sent you ? 
 warwick . we have , my lieg . 
 king . then you perceiv the bodi of our kingdom 
 how foul it is ; what rank diseas grow , 
 and with what danger , near the heart of it . 
 warwick . it is but as a bodi yet distemp ; 
 which to hi former strength may be restor 
 with good advic and littl medicin . 
 my lord northumberland will soon be cool 'd . 
 king . o god ! that one might read the book of fate , 
 and see the revolut of the time 
 make mountain level , and the contin , 
 weari of solid firm , melt itself 
 into the sea ; and other time to see 
 the beachi girdl of the ocean 
 too wide for neptun 's hip ; how chanc mock , 
 and chang fill the cup of alter 
 with diver liquor ! o , if thi were seen , 
 the happiest youth , view hi progress through , 
 what peril past , what cross to ensu , 
 would shut the book and sit him down and die . 
 't is not ten year gone 
 sinc richard and northumberland , great friend , 
 did feast togeth , and in two year after 
 were they at war . it is but eight year sinc 
 thi perci wa the man nearest my soul ; 
 who like a brother toil 'd in my affair 
 and laid hi love and life under my foot ; 
 yea , for my sake , even to the eye of richard 
 gave him defianc . but which of you wa by- 
 [ to warwick ] you , cousin nevil , as i may remember- 
 when richard , with hi eye brim full of tear , 
 then check 'd and rate by northumberland , 
 did speak these word , now prov 'd a propheci ? 
 'northumberland , thou ladder by the which 
 my cousin bolingbrok ascend my throne'- 
 though then , god know , i had no such intent 
 but that necess so bow 'd the state 
 that i and great were compel 'd to kiss- 
 'the time shall come'- thu did he follow it- 
 'the time will come that foul sin , gather head , 
 shall break into corrupt ' so went on , 
 foretel thi same time 's condit 
 and the divis of our amiti . 
 warwick . there is a histori in all men 's live , 
 figur the natur of the time decea 'd ; 
 the which observ 'd , a man may prophesi , 
 with a near aim , of the main chanc of thing 
 as yet not come to life , who in their seed 
 and weak begin lie intreasur . 
 such thing becom the hatch and brood of time ; 
 and , by the necessari form of thi , 
 king richard might creat a perfect guess 
 that great northumberland , then fals to him , 
 would of that seed grow to a greater fals ; 
 which should not find a ground to root upon 
 unless on you . 
 king . are these thing then necess ? 
 then let us meet them like necess ; 
 and that same word even now cri out on us . 
 they say the bishop and northumberland 
 are fifti thousand strong . 
 warwick . it can not be , my lord . 
 rumour doth doubl , like the voic and echo , 
 the number of the fear . pleas it your grace 
 to go to bed . upon my soul , my lord , 
 the power that you alreadi have sent forth 
 shall bring thi prize in veri easili . 
 to comfort you the more , i have receiv 'd 
 a certain instanc that glendow is dead . 
 your majesti hath been thi fortnight ill ; 
 and these unseason hour perforc must ad 
 unto your sick . 
 king . i will take your counsel . 
 and , were these inward war onc out of hand , 
 we would , dear lord , unto the holi land . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 gloucestershir . befor justic , shallow 's hous 
 
 enter shallow and silenc , meet ; mouldi , shadow , wart , feebl , bullcalf , 
 and servant behind 
 
 shallow . come on , come on , come on ; give me your hand , sir ; give me 
 your hand , sir . an earli stirrer , by the rood ! and how doth my 
 good cousin silenc ? 
 silenc . good morrow , good cousin shallow . 
 shallow . and how doth my cousin , your bed-fellow ? and your fairest 
 daughter and mine , my god-daught ellen ? 
 silenc . ala , a black ousel , cousin shallow ! 
 shallow . by yea and no , sir . i dare say my cousin william is becom 
 a good scholar ; he is at oxford still , is he not ? 
 silenc . inde , sir , to my cost . 
 shallow . ' a must , then , to the inn o ' court shortli . i wa onc of 
 clement 's inn ; where i think they will talk of mad shallow yet . 
 silenc . you were call 'd 'lusti shallow ' then , cousin . 
 shallow . by the mass , i wa call 'd anyth ; and i would have done 
 anyth inde too , and roundli too . there wa i , and littl 
 john doit of staffordshir , and black georg barn , and franci 
 pickbon , and will squel a cotsol man- you had not four such 
 swinge-buckl in all the inn of court again . and i may say to 
 you we knew where the bona-roba were , and had the best of them 
 all at command . then wa jack falstaff , now sir john , boy , 
 and page to thoma mowbray , duke of norfolk . 
 silenc . thi sir john , cousin , that come hither anon about 
 soldier ? 
 shallow . the same sir john , the veri same . i see him break 
 scoggin 's head at the court gate , when ' a wa a crack not thu 
 high ; and the veri same day did i fight with one sampson 
 stockfish , a fruiter , behind gray 's inn . jesu , jesu , the mad 
 day that i have spent ! and to see how mani of my old 
 acquaint are dead ! 
 silenc . we shall all follow , cousin . 
 shallow . certain , 't is certain ; veri sure , veri sure . death , as the 
 psalmist saith , is certain to all ; all shall die . how a good yoke 
 of bullock at stamford fair ? 
 silenc . by my troth , i wa not there . 
 shallow . death is certain . is old doubl of your town live yet ? 
 silenc . dead , sir . 
 shallow . jesu , jesu , dead ! drew a good bow ; and dead ! ' a shot a 
 fine shoot . john a gaunt love him well , and bet much money on 
 hi head . dead ! ' a would have clapp 'd i ' th ' clout at twelv 
 score , and carri you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen 
 and a half , that it would have done a man 's heart good to see . 
 how a score of ewe now ? 
 silenc . thereaft as they be- a score of good ewe may be worth 
 ten pound . 
 shallow . and is old doubl dead ? 
 
 enter bardolph , and one with him 
 
 silenc . here come two of sir john falstaff men , as i think . 
 shallow . good morrow , honest gentlemen . 
 bardolph . i beseech you , which is justic shallow ? 
 shallow . i am robert shallow , sir , a poor esquir of thi counti , 
 and one of the king 's justic of the peac . what is your good 
 pleasur with me ? 
 bardolph . my captain , sir , commend him to you ; my captain , sir 
 john falstaff- a tall gentleman , by heaven , and a most gallant 
 leader . 
 shallow . he greet me well , sir ; i knew him a good back-sword man . 
 how doth the good knight ? may i ask how my ladi hi wife doth ? 
 bardolph . sir , pardon ; a soldier is better accommod than with a 
 wife . 
 shallow . it is well said , in faith , sir ; and it is well said inde 
 too . 'better accommod ! ' it is good ; yea , inde , is it . good 
 phrase are sure , and ever were , veri commend . 
 'accommod ! ' it come of accommodo . veri good ; a good phrase . 
 bardolph . pardon , sir ; i have heard the word . 'phrase ' call you it ? 
 by thi day , i know not the phrase ; but i will maintain the word 
 with my sword to be a soldier-lik word , and a word of exceed 
 good command , by heaven . accommod : that is , when a man is , as 
 they say , accommod ; or , when a man is being-wherebi ' a may be 
 thought to be accommod ; which is an excel thing . 
 
 enter falstaff 
 
 shallow . it is veri just . look , here come good sir john . give me 
 your good hand , give me your worship 's good hand . by my troth , 
 you like well and bear your year veri well . welcom , good sir 
 john . 
 falstaff . i am glad to see you well , good master robert shallow . 
 master surecard , as i think ? 
 shallow . no , sir john ; it is my cousin silenc , in commiss with 
 me . 
 falstaff . good master silenc , it well befit you should be of the 
 peac . 
 silenc . your good worship is welcom . 
 falstaff . fie ! thi is hot weather . gentlemen , have you provid me 
 here half a dozen suffici men ? 
 shallow . marri , have we , sir . will you sit ? 
 falstaff . let me see them , i beseech you . 
 shallow . where 's the roll ? where 's the roll ? where 's the roll ? let 
 me see , let me see , let me see . so , so , so , so , - so , so- yea , 
 marri , sir . rafe mouldi ! let them appear as i call ; let them do 
 so , let them do so . let me see ; where is mouldi ? 
 mouldi . here , a n't pleas you . 
 shallow . what think you , sir john ? a good-limb 'd fellow ; young , 
 strong , and of good friend . 
 falstaff . is thi name mouldi ? 
 mouldi . yea , a n't pleas you . 
 falstaff . 't is the more time thou wert us 'd . 
 shallow . ha , ha , ha ! most excel , i ' faith ! thing that are 
 mouldi lack use . veri singular good ! in faith , well said , sir 
 john ; veri well said . 
 falstaff . prick him . 
 mouldi . i wa prick 'd well enough befor , an you could have let me 
 alon . my old dame will be undon now for one to do her husbandri 
 and her drudgeri . you need not to have prick 'd me ; there are 
 other men fitter to go out than i . 
 falstaff . go to ; peac , mouldi ; you shall go . mouldi , it is time 
 you were spent . 
 mouldi . spent ! 
 shallow . peac , fellow , peac ; stand asid ; know you where you are ? 
 for th ' other , sir john- let me see . simon shadow ! 
 falstaff . yea , marri , let me have him to sit under . he 's like to be 
 a cold soldier . 
 shallow . where 's shadow ? 
 shadow . here , sir . 
 falstaff . shadow , whose son art thou ? 
 shadow . my mother 's son , sir . 
 falstaff . thi mother 's son ! like enough ; and thi father 's shadow . 
 so the son of the femal is the shadow of the male . it is often 
 so inde ; but much of the father 's substanc ! 
 shallow . do you like him , sir john ? 
 falstaff . shadow will serv for summer . prick him ; for we have a 
 number of shadow fill up the muster-book . 
 shallow . thoma wart ! 
 falstaff . where 's he ? 
 wart . here , sir . 
 falstaff . is thi name wart ? 
 wart . yea , sir . 
 falstaff . thou art a veri rag wart . 
 shallow . shall i prick him , sir john ? 
 falstaff . it were superflu ; for hi apparel is built upon hi 
 back , and the whole frame stand upon pin . prick him no more . 
 shallow . ha , ha , ha ! you can do it , sir ; you can do it . i commend 
 you well . franci feebl ! 
 feebl . here , sir . 
 falstaff . what trade art thou , feebl ? 
 feebl . a woman 's tailor , sir . 
 shallow . shall i prick him , sir ? 
 falstaff . you may ; but if he had been a man 's tailor , he 'd ha ' 
 prick 'd you . wilt thou make as mani hole in an enemi 's battl as 
 thou hast done in a woman 's petticoat ? 
 feebl . i will do my good will , sir ; you can have no more . 
 falstaff . well said , good woman 's tailor ! well said , courag 
 feebl ! thou wilt be as valiant as the wrath dove or most 
 magnanim mous . prick the woman 's tailor- well , master 
 shallow , deep , master shallow . 
 feebl . i would wart might have gone , sir . 
 falstaff . i would thou wert a man 's tailor , that thou mightst mend 
 him and make him fit to go . i can not put him to a privat 
 soldier , that is the leader of so mani thousand . let that 
 suffic , most forcibl feebl . 
 feebl . it shall suffic , sir . 
 falstaff . i am bound to thee , reverend feebl . who is next ? 
 shallow . peter bullcalf o ' th ' green ! 
 falstaff . yea , marri , let 's see bullcalf . 
 bullcalf . here , sir . 
 falstaff . fore god , a like fellow ! come , prick me bullcalf till 
 he roar again . 
 bullcalf . o lord ! good my lord captain- 
 falstaff . what , dost thou roar befor thou art prick 'd ? 
 bullcalf . o lord , sir ! i am a diseas man . 
 falstaff . what diseas hast thou ? 
 bullcalf . a whoreson cold , sir , a cough , sir , which i caught with 
 ring in the king 's affair upon hi coron day , sir . 
 falstaff . come , thou shalt go to the war in a gown . we will have 
 away thi cold ; and i will take such order that thi friend shall 
 ring for thee . is here all ? 
 shallow . here is two more call 'd than your number . you must have 
 but four here , sir ; and so , i pray you , go in with me to dinner . 
 falstaff . come , i will go drink with you , but i can not tarri 
 dinner . i am glad to see you , by my troth , master shallow . 
 shallow . o , sir john , do you rememb sinc we lay all night in the 
 windmil in saint georg 's field ? 
 falstaff . no more of that , master shallow , no more of that . 
 shallow . ha , 't wa a merri night . and is jane nightwork aliv ? 
 falstaff . she live , master shallow . 
 shallow . she never could away with me . 
 falstaff . never , never ; she would alway say she could not abid 
 master shallow . 
 shallow . by the mass , i could anger her to th ' heart . she wa then 
 a bona-roba . doth she hold her own well ? 
 falstaff . old , old , master shallow . 
 shallow . nay , she must be old ; she can not choos but be old ; 
 certain she 's old ; and had robin nightwork , by old nightwork , 
 befor i came to clement 's inn . 
 silenc . that 's fifty-f year ago . 
 shallow . ha , cousin silenc , that thou hadst seen that that thi 
 knight and i have seen ! ha , sir john , said i well ? 
 falstaff . we have heard the chime at midnight , master shallow . 
 shallow . that we have , that we have , that we have ; in faith , sir 
 john , we have . our watchword wa 'hem , boy ! ' come , let 's to 
 dinner ; come , let 's to dinner . jesu , the day that we have seen ! 
 come , come . 
 exeunt falstaff and the justic 
 bullcalf . good master corpor bardolph , stand my friend ; and 
 here 's four harri ten shill in french crown for you . in veri 
 truth , sir , i had as lief be hang 'd , sir , as go . and yet , for 
 mine own part , sir , i do not care ; but rather becaus i am 
 unwil and , for mine own part , have a desir to stay with my 
 friend ; els , sir , i did not care for mine own part so much . 
 bardolph . go to ; stand asid . 
 mouldi . and , good master corpor captain , for my old dame 's sake , 
 stand my friend . she ha nobodi to do anyth about her when i 
 am gone ; and she is old , and can not help herself . you shall have 
 forti , sir . 
 bardolph . go to ; stand asid . 
 feebl . by my troth , i care not ; a man can die but onc ; we owe god 
 a death . i 'll ne'er bear a base mind . a n't be my destini , so ; 
 a n't be not , so . no man 's too good to serv 's princ ; and , let 
 it go which way it will , he that die thi year is quit for the 
 next . 
 bardolph . well said ; th'art a good fellow . 
 feebl . faith , i 'll bear no base mind . 
 
 re-ent falstaff and the justic 
 
 falstaff . come , sir , which men shall i have ? 
 shallow . four of which you pleas . 
 bardolph . sir , a word with you . i have three pound to free mouldi 
 and bullcalf . 
 falstaff . go to ; well . 
 shallow . come , sir john , which four will you have ? 
 falstaff . do you choos for me . 
 shallow . marri , then- mouldi , bullcalf , feebl , and shadow . 
 falstaff . mouldi and bullcalf : for you , mouldi , stay at home till 
 you are past servic ; and for your part , bullcalf , grow you come 
 unto it . i will none of you . 
 shallow . sir john , sir john , do not yourself wrong . they are your 
 likeliest men , and i would have you serv 'd with the best . 
 falstaff . will you tell me , master shallow , how to choos a man ? 
 care i for the limb , the thew , the statur , bulk , and big 
 assembl of a man ! give me the spirit , master shallow . here 's 
 wart ; you see what a rag appear it is . ' a shall charg you 
 and discharg you with the motion of a pewter 's hammer , come 
 off and on swifter than he that gibbet on the brewer 's bucket . 
 and thi same half-fac 'd fellow , shadow- give me thi man . he 
 present no mark to the enemi ; the foeman may with as great aim 
 level at the edg of a penknif . and , for a retreat- how swiftli 
 will thi feebl , the woman 's tailor , run off ! o , give me the 
 spare men , and spare me the great one . put me a caliv into 
 wart 's hand , bardolph . 
 bardolph . hold , wart . traverse- thu , thu , thu . 
 falstaff . come , manag me your caliv . so- veri well . go to ; veri 
 good ; exceed good . o , give me alway a littl , lean , old , 
 chopt , bald shot . well said , i ' faith , wart ; th'art a good scab . 
 hold , there 's a tester for thee . 
 shallow . he is not hi craft 's master , he doth not do it right . i 
 rememb at mile-end green , when i lay at clement 's inn- i wa 
 then sir dagonet in arthur 's show- there wa a littl quiver 
 fellow , and ' a would manag you hi piec thu ; and ' a would 
 about and about , and come you in and come you in . 'rah , tah , 
 tah ! ' would ' a say ; 'bounc ! ' would ' a say ; and away again would 
 ' a go , and again would ' a come . i shall ne'er see such a fellow . 
 falstaff . these fellow will do well . master shallow , god keep you ! 
 master silenc , i will not use mani word with you : fare you 
 well ! gentlemen both , i thank you . i must a dozen mile to-night . 
 bardolph , give the soldier coat . 
 shallow . sir john , the lord bless you ; god prosper your affair ; 
 god send us peac ! at your return , visit our hous ; let our old 
 acquaint be renew . peradventur i will with ye to the 
 court . 
 falstaff . fore god , would you would . 
 shallow . go to ; i have spoke at a word . god keep you . 
 falstaff . fare you well , gentl gentlemen . [ exeunt justic ] on , 
 bardolph ; lead the men away . [ exeunt all but falstaff ] as i 
 return , i will fetch off these justic . i do see the bottom of 
 justic shallow . lord , lord , how subject we old men are to thi 
 vice of lie ! thi same starv 'd justic hath done noth but 
 prate to me of the wild of hi youth and the feat he hath 
 done about turnbul street ; and everi third word a lie , duer paid 
 to the hearer than the turk 's tribut . i do rememb him at 
 clement 's inn , like a man made after supper of a cheese-par . 
 when ' a wa nake , he wa for all the world like a fork 'd radish , 
 with a head fantast carv upon it with a knife . ' a wa so 
 forlorn that hi dimens to ani thick sight were invis . ' a 
 wa the veri geniu of famin ; yet lecher as a monkey , and the 
 whore call 'd him mandrak . ' a came ever in the rearward of the 
 fashion , and sung those tune to the overscutch 'd huswif that 
 he heard the carmen whistl , and sware they were hi fanci or 
 hi good-night . and now is thi vice 's dagger becom a squir , 
 and talk as familiarli of john a gaunt as if he had been sworn 
 brother to him ; and i 'll be sworn ' a ne'er saw him but onc in 
 the tiltyard ; and then he burst hi head for crowd among the 
 marshal 's men . i saw it , and told john a gaunt he beat hi own 
 name ; for you might have thrust him and all hi apparel into an 
 eel-skin ; the case of a trebl hautboy wa a mansion for him , a 
 court- and now ha he land and beev . well , i 'll be acquaint 
 with him if i return ; and 't shall go hard but i 'll make him a 
 philosoph 's two stone to me . if the young dace be a bait for 
 the old pike , i see no reason in the law of natur but i may snap 
 at him . let time shape , and there an end . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 yorkshir . within the forest of gaultre 
 
 enter the archbishop of york , mowbray , hast , and other 
 
 archbishop . what is thi forest call 'd 
 hast . 't is gaultre forest , a n't shall pleas your grace . 
 archbishop . here stand , my lord , and send discover forth 
 to know the number of our enemi . 
 hast . we have sent forth alreadi . 
 archbishop . 't is well done . 
 my friend and brethren in these great affair , 
 i must acquaint you that i have receiv 'd 
 new-dat letter from northumberland ; 
 their cold intent , tenour , and substanc , thu : 
 here doth he wish hi person , with such power 
 as might hold sortanc with hi qualiti , 
 the which he could not levi ; whereupon 
 he is retir 'd , to ripe hi grow fortun , 
 to scotland ; and conclud in hearti prayer 
 that your attempt may overl the hazard 
 and fear meet of their opposit . 
 mowbray . thu do the hope we have in him touch ground 
 and dash themselv to piec . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 hast . now , what news ? 
 messeng . west of thi forest , scarc off a mile , 
 in goodli form come on the enemi ; 
 and , by the ground they hide , i judg their number 
 upon or near the rate of thirti thousand . 
 mowbray . the just proport that we gave them out . 
 let us sway on and face them in the field . 
 
 enter westmoreland 
 
 archbishop . what well-appoint leader front us here ? 
 mowbray . i think it is my lord of westmoreland . 
 westmoreland . health and fair greet from our gener , 
 the princ , lord john and duke of lancast . 
 archbishop . say on , my lord of westmoreland , in peac , 
 what doth concern your come . 
 westmoreland . then , my lord , 
 unto your grace do i in chief address 
 the substanc of my speech . if that rebellion 
 came like itself , in base and abject rout , 
 led on by bloodi youth , guard with rag , 
 and countenanc 'd by boy and beggary- 
 i say , if damn 'd commot so appear 'd 
 in hi true , nativ , and most proper shape , 
 you , reverend father , and these nobl lord , 
 had not been here to dress the ugli form 
 of base and bloodi insurrect 
 with your fair honour . you , lord archbishop , 
 whose see is by a civil peac maintain 'd , 
 whose beard the silver hand of peac hath touch 'd , 
 whose learn and good letter peac hath tutor 'd , 
 whose white invest figur innoc , 
 the dove , and veri bless spirit of peace- 
 wherefor you do so ill translat yourself 
 out of the speech of peac , that bear such grace , 
 into the harsh and boist'rou tongu of war ; 
 turn your book to grave , your ink to blood , 
 your pen to lanc , and your tongu divin 
 to a loud trumpet and a point of war ? 
 archbishop . wherefor do i thi ? so the question stand . 
 briefli to thi end : we are all disea 'd 
 and with our surfeit and wanton hour 
 have brought ourselv into a burn fever , 
 and we must bleed for it ; of which diseas 
 our late king , richard , be infect , die . 
 but , my most nobl lord of westmoreland , 
 i take not on me here as a physician ; 
 nor do i as an enemi to peac 
 troop in the throng of militari men ; 
 but rather show awhil like fear war 
 to diet rank mind sick of happi , 
 and purg th ' obstruct which begin to stop 
 our veri vein of life . hear me more plainli . 
 i have in equal balanc justli weigh 'd 
 what wrong our arm may do , what wrong we suffer , 
 and find our grief heavier than our offenc . 
 we see which way the stream of time doth run 
 and are enforc 'd from our most quiet there 
 by the rough torrent of occas ; 
 and have the summari of all our grief , 
 when time shall serv , to show in articl ; 
 which long ere thi we offer 'd to the king , 
 and might by no suit gain our audienc : 
 when we are wrong 'd , and would unfold our grief , 
 we are deni access unto hi person , 
 even by those men that most have done us wrong . 
 the danger of the day but newli gone , 
 whose memori is written on the earth 
 with yet appear blood , and the exampl 
 of everi minut 's instanc , present now , 
 hath put us in these ill-beseem arm ; 
 not to break peac , or ani branch of it , 
 but to establish here a peac inde , 
 concur both in name and qualiti . 
 westmoreland . when ever yet wa your appeal deni ; 
 wherein have you been gall by the king ; 
 what peer hath been suborn 'd to grate on you 
 that you should seal thi lawless bloodi book 
 of forg 'd rebellion with a seal divin , 
 and consecr commot 's bitter edg ? 
 archbishop . my brother gener , the commonwealth , 
 to brother horn an household cruelti , 
 i make my quarrel in particular . 
 westmoreland . there is no need of ani such redress ; 
 or if there were , it not belong to you . 
 mowbray . whi not to him in part , and to us all 
 that feel the bruis of the day befor , 
 and suffer the condit of these time 
 to lay a heavi and unequ hand 
 upon our honour ? 
 westmoreland . o my good lord mowbray , 
 constru the time to their necess , 
 and you shall say , inde , it is the time , 
 and not the king , that doth you injuri . 
 yet , for your part , it not appear to me , 
 either from the king or in the present time , 
 that you should have an inch of ani ground 
 to build a grief on . were you not restor 'd 
 to all the duke of norfolk 's signiori , 
 your nobl and right well-rememb'r father 's ? 
 mowbray . what thing , in honour , had my father lost 
 that need to be reviv 'd and breath 'd in me ? 
 the king that lov 'd him , as the state stood then , 
 wa forc perforc compel 'd to banish him , 
 and then that henri bolingbrok and he , 
 be mount and both rous in their seat , 
 their neigh courser dare of the spur , 
 their arm stave in charg , their beaver down , 
 their eye of fire sparkl through sight of steel , 
 and the loud trumpet blow them together- 
 then , then , when there wa noth could have stay 'd 
 my father from the breast of bolingbrok , 
 o , when the king did throw hi warder down- 
 hi own life hung upon the staff he threw- 
 then threw he down himself , and all their live 
 that by indict and by dint of sword 
 have sinc miscarri under bolingbrok . 
 westmoreland . you speak , lord mowbray , now you know not what . 
 the earl of hereford wa reput then 
 in england the most valiant gentleman . 
 who know on whom fortun would then have smil 'd ? 
 but if your father had been victor there , 
 he ne'er had born it out of coventri ; 
 for all the countri , in a gener voic , 
 cri hate upon him ; and all their prayer and love 
 were set on hereford , whom they dote on , 
 and bless 'd and grac 'd inde more than the king . 
 but thi is mere digress from my purpos . 
 here come i from our princ gener 
 to know your grief ; to tell you from hi grace 
 that he will give you audienc ; and wherein 
 it shall appear that your demand are just , 
 you shall enjoy them , everyth set off 
 that might so much as think you enemi . 
 mowbray . but he hath forc 'd us to compel thi offer ; 
 and it proce from polici , not love . 
 westmoreland . mowbray . you overween to take it so . 
 thi offer come from merci , not from fear ; 
 for , lo ! within a ken our armi lies- 
 upon mine honour , all too confid 
 to give admitt to a thought of fear . 
 our battl is more full of name than your , 
 our men more perfect in the use of arm , 
 our armour all as strong , our caus the best ; 
 then reason will our heart should be as good . 
 say you not , then , our offer is compel 'd . 
 mowbray . well , by my will we shall admit no parley . 
 westmoreland . that argu but the shame of your offenc : 
 a rotten case abid no handl . 
 hast . hath the princ john a full commiss , 
 in veri ampl virtu of hi father , 
 to hear and absolut to determin 
 of what condit we shall stand upon ? 
 westmoreland . that is intend in the gener 's name . 
 i muse you make so slight a question . 
 archbishop . then take , my lord of westmoreland , thi schedul , 
 for thi contain our gener grievanc . 
 each sever articl herein redress 'd , 
 all member of our caus , both here and henc , 
 that are insinew to thi action , 
 acquit by a true substanti form , 
 and present execut of our will 
 to us and to our purpos confin'd- 
 we come within our aw bank again , 
 and knit our power to the arm of peac . 
 westmoreland . thi will i show the gener . pleas you , lord , 
 in sight of both our battl we may meet ; 
 and either end in peace- which god so frame ! - 
 or to the place of diff'renc call the sword 
 which must decid it . 
 archbishop . my lord , we will do so . exit westmoreland 
 mowbray . there is a thing within my bosom tell me 
 that no condit of our peac can stand . 
 hast . fear you not that : if we can make our peac 
 upon such larg term and so absolut 
 as our condit shall consist upon , 
 our peac shall stand as firm as rocki mountain . 
 mowbray . yea , but our valuat shall be such 
 that everi slight and false-deriv caus , 
 yea , everi idl , nice , and wanton reason , 
 shall to the king tast of thi action ; 
 that , were our royal faith martyr in love , 
 we shall be winnow 'd with so rough a wind 
 that even our corn shall seem as light as chaff , 
 and good from bad find no partit . 
 archbishop . no , no , my lord . note thi : the king is weari 
 of dainti and such pick grievanc ; 
 for he hath found to end one doubt by death 
 reviv two greater in the heir of life ; 
 and therefor will he wipe hi tabl clean , 
 and keep no tell-tal to hi memori 
 that may repeat and histori hi lo 
 to new remembr . for full well he know 
 he can not so precis weed thi land 
 as hi misdoubt present occas : 
 hi foe are so enroot with hi friend 
 that , pluck to unfix an enemi , 
 he doth unfasten so and shake a friend . 
 so that thi land , like an offens wife 
 that hath enrag 'd him on to offer stroke , 
 as he is strike , hold hi infant up , 
 and hang resolv 'd correct in the arm 
 that wa uprear 'd to execut . 
 hast . besid , the king hath wast all hi rod 
 on late offend , that he now doth lack 
 the veri instrument of chastis ; 
 so that hi power , like to a fangless lion , 
 may offer , but not hold . 
 archbishop . 't is veri true ; 
 and therefor be assur 'd , my good lord marshal , 
 if we do now make our aton well , 
 our peac will , like a broken limb unit , 
 grow stronger for the break . 
 mowbray . be it so . 
 here is return 'd my lord of westmoreland . 
 
 re-ent westmoreland 
 
 westmoreland . the princ is here at hand . pleaseth your lordship 
 to meet hi grace just distanc 'tween our armi ? 
 mowbray . your grace of york , in god 's name then , set forward . 
 archbishop . befor , and greet hi grace . my lord , we come . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 anoth part of the forest 
 
 enter , from one side , mowbray , attend ; afterward , the archbishop , 
 hast , and other ; from the other side , princ john of lancast , 
 westmoreland , offic , and other 
 
 princ john . you are well encount'r here , my cousin mowbray . 
 good day to you , gentl lord archbishop ; 
 and so to you , lord hast , and to all . 
 my lord of york , it better show 'd with you 
 when that your flock , assembl by the bell , 
 encircl you to hear with rever 
 your exposit on the holi text 
 than now to see you here an iron man , 
 cheer a rout of rebel with your drum , 
 turn the word to sword , and life to death . 
 that man that sit within a monarch 's heart 
 and ripen in the sunshin of hi favour , 
 would he abus the counten of the king , 
 alack , what mischief might he set abroach 
 in shadow of such great ! with you , lord bishop , 
 it is even so . who hath not heard it spoken 
 how deep you were within the book of god ? 
 to us the speaker in hi parliament , 
 to us th ' imagin 'd voic of god himself , 
 the veri open and intelligenc 
 between the grace , the sanctiti of heaven , 
 and our dull work . o , who shall believ 
 but you misus the rever of your place , 
 employ the counten and grace of heav'n 
 as a fals favourit doth hi princ 's name , 
 in deed dishonour ? you have ta'en up , 
 under the counterfeit zeal of god , 
 the subject of hi substitut , my father , 
 and both against the peac of heaven and him 
 have here up-swarm 'd them . 
 archbishop . good my lord of lancast , 
 i am not here against your father 's peac ; 
 but , as i told my lord of westmoreland , 
 the time misord'r doth , in common sens , 
 crowd us and crush us to thi monstrou form 
 to hold our safeti up . i sent your grace 
 the parcel and particular of our grief , 
 the which hath been with scorn shov 'd from the court , 
 whereon thi hydra son of war is born ; 
 whose danger eye may well be charm 'd asleep 
 with grant of our most just and right desir ; 
 and true obedi , of thi mad cur 'd , 
 stoop tame to the foot of majesti . 
 mowbray . if not , we readi are to tri our fortun 
 to the last man . 
 hast . and though we here fall down , 
 we have suppli to second our attempt . 
 if they miscarri , their shall second them ; 
 and so success of mischief shall be born , 
 and heir from heir shall hold thi quarrel up 
 while england shall have gener . 
 princ john . you are too shallow , hast , much to shallow , 
 to sound the bottom of the after-tim . 
 westmoreland . pleaseth your grace to answer them directli 
 how far forth you do like their articl . 
 princ john . i like them all and do allow them well ; 
 and swear here , by the honour of my blood , 
 my father 's purpos have been mistook ; 
 and some about him have too lavishli 
 wrest hi mean and author . 
 my lord , these grief shall be with speed redress 'd ; 
 upon my soul , they shall . if thi may pleas you , 
 discharg your power unto their sever counti , 
 as we will our ; and here , between the armi , 
 let 's drink togeth friendli and embrac , 
 that all their eye may bear those token home 
 of our restor love and amiti . 
 archbishop . i take your princ word for these redress . 
 princ john . i give it you , and will maintain my word ; 
 and thereupon i drink unto your grace . 
 hast . go , captain , and deliv to the armi 
 thi news of peac . let them have pay , and part . 
 i know it will pleas them . hie thee , captain . 
 exit offic 
 archbishop . to you , my nobl lord of westmoreland . 
 westmoreland . i pledg your grace ; and if you knew what pain 
 i have bestow 'd to breed thi present peac , 
 you would drink freeli ; but my love to ye 
 shall show itself more openli hereaft . 
 archbishop . i do not doubt you . 
 westmoreland . i am glad of it . 
 health to my lord and gentl cousin , mowbray . 
 mowbray . you wish me health in veri happi season , 
 for i am on the sudden someth ill. 
 archbishop . against ill chanc men are ever merri ; 
 but heavi forerun the good event . 
 westmoreland . therefor be merri , coz ; sinc sudden sorrow 
 serv to say thu , 'some good thing come to-morrow . ' 
 archbishop . believ me , i am pass light in spirit . 
 mowbray . so much the wors , if your own rule be true . 
 [ shout within ] 
 princ john . the word of peac is rend'r . hark , how they shout ! 
 mowbray . thi had been cheer after victori . 
 archbishop . a peac is of the natur of a conquest ; 
 for then both parti nobli are subdu 'd , 
 and neither parti loser . 
 princ john . go , my lord , 
 and let our armi be discharg too . 
 exit westmoreland 
 and , good my lord , so pleas you let our train 
 march by us , that we may perus the men 
 we should have cop 'd withal . 
 archbishop . go , good lord hast , 
 and , ere they be dismiss 'd , let them march by . 
 exit hast 
 princ john . i trust , lord , we shall lie to-night togeth . 
 
 re-ent westmoreland 
 
 now , cousin , wherefor stand our armi still ? 
 westmoreland . the leader , have charg from you to stand , 
 will not go off until they hear you speak . 
 princ john . they know their duti . 
 
 re-ent hast 
 
 hast . my lord , our armi is disper 'd alreadi . 
 like youth steer unyok 'd , they take their cours 
 east , west , north , south ; or like a school broke up , 
 each hurri toward hi home and sporting-plac . 
 westmoreland . good tide , my lord hast ; for the which 
 i do arrest thee , traitor , of high treason ; 
 and you , lord archbishop , and you , lord mowbray , 
 of capit treason i attach you both . 
 mowbray . is thi proceed just and honour ? 
 westmoreland . is your assembl so ? 
 archbishop . will you thu break your faith ? 
 princ john . i pawn 'd thee none : 
 i promi 'd you redress of these same grievanc 
 whereof you did complain ; which , by mine honour , 
 i will perform with a most christian care . 
 but for you , rebels- look to tast the due 
 meet for rebellion and such act as your . 
 most shallowli did you these arm commenc , 
 fondli brought here , and foolishli sent henc . 
 strike up our drum , pursu the scatt'r stray . 
 god , and not we , hath safe fought to-day . 
 some guard these traitor to the block of death , 
 treason 's true bed and yielder-up of breath . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 anoth part of the forest 
 
 alarum ; excurs . enter falstaff and colvil , meet 
 
 falstaff . what 's your name , sir ? of what condit are you , and of 
 what place , i pray ? 
 colvil . i am a knight sir ; and my name is colvil of the dale . 
 falstaff . well then , colvil is your name , a knight is your 
 degre , and your place the dale . colvil shall still be your 
 name , a traitor your degre , and the dungeon your place- a place 
 deep enough ; so shall you be still colvil of the dale . 
 colvil . are not you sir john falstaff ? 
 falstaff . as good a man as he , sir , whoe'er i am . do you yield , 
 sir , or shall i sweat for you ? if i do sweat , they are the drop 
 of thi lover , and they weep for thi death ; therefor rous up 
 fear and trembl , and do observ to my merci . 
 colvil . i think you are sir john falstaff , and in that thought 
 yield me . 
 falstaff . i have a whole school of tongu in thi belli of mine ; 
 and not a tongu of them all speak ani other word but my name . 
 an i had but a belli of ani indiffer , i were simpli the most 
 activ fellow in europ . my womb , my womb , my womb undo me . 
 here come our gener . 
 
 enter princ john of lancast , westmoreland , 
 blunt , and other 
 
 princ john . the heat is past ; follow no further now . 
 call in the power , good cousin westmoreland . 
 exit westmoreland 
 now , falstaff , where have you been all thi while ? 
 when everyth is end , then you come . 
 these tardi trick of your will , on my life , 
 one time or other break some gallow ' back . 
 falstaff . i would be sorri , my lord , but it should be thu : i never 
 knew yet but rebuk and check wa the reward of valour . do you 
 think me a swallow , an arrow , or a bullet ? have i , in my poor and 
 old motion , the expedit of thought ? i have speed hither with 
 the veri extremest inch of possibl ; i have found'r nine 
 score and odd post ; and here , travel taint as i am , have , in 
 my pure and immacul valour , taken sir john colvil of the 
 dale , a most furiou knight and valor enemi . but what of that ? 
 he saw me , and yield ; that i may justli say with the hook-no 'd 
 fellow of rome-i came , saw , and overcam . 
 princ john . it wa more of hi courtesi than your deserv . 
 falstaff . i know not . here he is , and here i yield him ; and i 
 beseech your grace , let it be book 'd with the rest of thi day 's 
 deed ; or , by the lord , i will have it in a particular ballad 
 els , with mine own pictur on the top o n't , colvil kiss my 
 foot ; to the which cours if i be enforc 'd , if you do not all 
 show like gilt twopenc to me , and i , in the clear sky of fame , 
 o'ershin you as much as the full moon doth the cinder of the 
 element , which show like pin ' head to her , believ not the word 
 of the nobl . therefor let me have right , and let desert mount . 
 princ john . thine 's too heavi to mount . 
 falstaff . let it shine , then . 
 princ john . thine 's too thick to shine . 
 falstaff . let it do someth , my good lord , that may do me good , 
 and call it what you will . 
 princ john . is thi name colvil ? 
 colvil . it is , my lord . 
 princ john . a famou rebel art thou , colvil . 
 falstaff . and a famou true subject took him . 
 colvil . i am , my lord , but as my better are 
 that led me hither . had they been rul 'd by me , 
 you should have won them dearer than you have . 
 falstaff . i know not how they sold themselv ; but thou , like a 
 kind fellow , gavest thyself away grati ; and i thank thee for 
 thee . 
 
 re-ent westmoreland 
 
 princ john . now , have you left pursuit ? 
 westmoreland . retreat is made , and execut stay 'd . 
 princ john . send colvil , with hi confeder , 
 to york , to present execut . 
 blunt , lead him henc ; and see you guard him sure . 
 exeunt blunt and other 
 and now dispatch we toward the court , my lord . 
 i hear the king my father is sore sick . 
 our news shall go befor us to hi majesti , 
 which , cousin , you shall bear to comfort him 
 and we with sober speed will follow you . 
 falstaff . my lord , i beseech you , give me leav to go through 
 gloucestershir ; and , when you come to court , stand my good lord , 
 pray , in your good report . 
 princ john . fare you well , falstaff . i , in my condit , 
 shall better speak of you than you deserv . 
 exeunt all but falstaff 
 falstaff . i would you had but the wit ; 'twere better than your 
 dukedom . good faith , thi same young sober-blood boy doth not 
 love me ; nor a man can not make him laugh- but that 's no marvel ; 
 he drink no wine . there 's never none of these demur boy come 
 to ani proof ; for thin drink doth so over-cool their blood , and 
 make mani fish-meal , that they fall into a kind of male 
 green-sick ; and then , when they marri , they get wench . they 
 are gener fool and cowards-which some of us should be too , 
 but for inflamm . a good sherris-sack hath a two-fold 
 oper in it . it ascend me into the brain ; dri me there all 
 the foolish and dull and crudi vapour which environ it ; make it 
 apprehens , quick , forget , full of nimbl , fieri , and 
 delect shape ; which deliv o'er to the voic , the tongu , 
 which is the birth , becom excel wit . the second properti of 
 your excel sherri is the warm of the blood ; which befor , 
 cold and settl , left the liver white and pale , which is the 
 badg of pusillanim and cowardic ; but the sherri warm it , 
 and make it cours from the inward to the part extrem . it 
 illumineth the face , which , as a beacon , give warn to all the 
 rest of thi littl kingdom , man , to arm ; and then the vital 
 common and inland petti spirit muster me all to their 
 captain , the heart , who , great and puff 'd up with thi retinu , 
 doth ani deed of courage- and thi valour come of sherri . so 
 that skill in the weapon is noth without sack , for that set 
 it a-work ; and learn , a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil 
 till sack commenc it and set it in act and use . hereof come 
 it that princ harri is valiant ; for the cold blood he did 
 natur inherit of hi father , he hath , like lean , steril , and 
 bare land , manur , husband , and till 'd , with excel 
 endeavour of drink good and good store of fertil sherri , 
 that he is becom veri hot and valiant . if i had a thousand son , 
 the first human principl i would teach them should be to 
 forswear thin potat and to addict themselv to sack . 
 
 enter bardolph 
 
 how now , bardolph ! 
 bardolph . the armi is discharg all and gone . 
 falstaff . let them go . i 'll through gloucestershir , and there will 
 i visit master robert shallow , esquir . i have him alreadi 
 temp'r between my finger and my thumb , and shortli will i seal 
 with him . come away . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 westminst . the jerusalem chamber 
 
 enter the king , princ thoma of clarenc , princ humphrey of gloucest , 
 warwick , and other 
 
 king . now , lord , if god doth give success end 
 to thi debat that bleedeth at our door , 
 we will our youth lead on to higher field , 
 and draw no sword but what are sanctifi . 
 our navi is address 'd , our power connect , 
 our substitut in absenc well invest , 
 and everyth lie level to our wish . 
 onli we want a littl person strength ; 
 and paus us till these rebel , now afoot , 
 come underneath the yoke of govern . 
 warwick . both which we doubt not but your majesti 
 shall soon enjoy . 
 king . humphrey , my son of gloucest , 
 where is the princ your brother ? 
 princ humphrey . i think he 's gone to hunt , my lord , at windsor . 
 king . and how accompani ? 
 princ humphrey . i do not know , my lord . 
 king . is not hi brother , thoma of clarenc , with him ? 
 princ humphrey . no , my good lord , he is in presenc here . 
 clarenc . what would my lord and father ? 
 king . noth but well to thee , thoma of clarenc . 
 how chanc thou art not with the princ thi brother ? 
 he love thee , and thou dost neglect him , thoma . 
 thou hast a better place in hi affect 
 than all thi brother ; cherish it , my boy , 
 and nobl offic thou mayst effect 
 of mediat , after i am dead , 
 between hi great and thi other brethren . 
 therefor omit him not ; blunt not hi love , 
 nor lose the good advantag of hi grace 
 by seem cold or careless of hi will ; 
 for he is graciou if he be observ 'd . 
 he hath a tear for piti and a hand 
 open as day for melt chariti ; 
 yet notwithstand , be incen 'd , he is flint ; 
 as humor as winter , and as sudden 
 as flaw congeal in the spring of day . 
 hi temper , therefor , must be well observ 'd . 
 chide him for fault , and do it rever , 
 when you perceiv hi blood inclin 'd to mirth ; 
 but , be moodi , give him line and scope 
 till that hi passion , like a whale on ground , 
 confound themselv with work . learn thi , thoma , 
 and thou shalt prove a shelter to thi friend , 
 a hoop of gold to bind thi brother in , 
 that the unit vessel of their blood , 
 mingl with venom of suggestion- 
 as , forc perforc , the age will pour it in- 
 shall never leak , though it do work as strong 
 as aconitum or rash gunpowd . 
 clarenc . i shall observ him with all care and love . 
 king . whi art thou not at windsor with him , thoma ? 
 clarenc . he is not there to-day ; he dine in london . 
 king . and how accompani ? canst thou tell that ? 
 clarenc . with poin , and other hi continu follow . 
 king . most subject is the fattest soil to weed ; 
 and he , the nobl imag of my youth , 
 is overspread with them ; therefor my grief 
 stretch itself beyond the hour of death . 
 the blood weep from my heart when i do shape , 
 in form imaginari , th'unguid day 
 and rotten time that you shall look upon 
 when i am sleep with my ancestor . 
 for when hi headstrong riot hath no curb , 
 when rage and hot blood are hi counsellor 
 when mean and lavish manner meet togeth , 
 o , with what wing shall hi affect fli 
 toward front peril and oppo 'd decay ! 
 warwick . my graciou lord , you look beyond him quit . 
 the princ but studi hi companion 
 like a strang tongu , wherein , to gain the languag , 
 't is need that the most immodest word 
 be look 'd upon and learnt ; which onc attain 'd , 
 your high know , come to no further use 
 but to be known and hate . so , like gross term , 
 the princ will , in the perfect of time , 
 cast off hi follow ; and their memori 
 shall as a pattern or a measur live 
 by which hi grace must mete the live of other , 
 turn past evil to advantag . 
 king . 't is seldom when the bee doth leav her comb 
 in the dead carrion . 
 
 enter westmoreland 
 
 who 's here ? westmoreland ? 
 westmoreland . health to my sovereign , and new happi 
 ad to that that am to deliv ! 
 princ john , your son , doth kiss your grace 's hand . 
 mowbray , the bishop scroop , hast , and all , 
 are brought to the correct of your law . 
 there is not now a rebel 's sword unsheath 'd , 
 but peac put forth her oliv everywher . 
 the manner how thi action hath been born 
 here at more leisur may your high read , 
 with everi cours in hi particular . 
 king . o westmoreland , thou art a summer bird , 
 which ever in the haunch of winter sing 
 the lift up of day . 
 
 enter harcourt 
 
 look here 's more news . 
 harcourt . from enemi heaven keep your majesti ; 
 and , when they stand against you , may they fall 
 as those that i am come to tell you of ! 
 the earl northumberland and the lord bardolph , 
 with a great power of english and of scot , 
 are by the shriev of yorkshir overthrown . 
 the manner and true order of the fight 
 thi packet , pleas it you , contain at larg . 
 king . and wherefor should these good news make me sick ? 
 will fortun never come with both hand full , 
 but write her fair word still in foulest letter ? 
 she either give a stomach and no food- 
 such are the poor , in health- or els a feast , 
 and take away the stomach- such are the rich 
 that have abund and enjoy it not . 
 i should rejoic now at thi happi news ; 
 and now my sight fail , and my brain is giddi . 
 o me ! come near me now i am much ill. 
 princ humphrey . comfort , your majesti ! 
 clarenc . o my royal father ! 
 westmoreland . my sovereign lord , cheer up yourself , look up . 
 warwick . be patient , princ ; you do know these fit 
 are with hi high veri ordinari . 
 stand from him , give him air ; he 'll straight be well . 
 clarenc . no , no ; he can not long hold out these pang . 
 th ' incess care and labour of hi mind 
 hath wrought the mure that should confin it in 
 so thin that life look through , and will break out . 
 princ humphrey . the peopl fear me ; for they do observ 
 unfath 'd heir and loathli birth of natur . 
 the season chang their manner , as the year 
 had found some month asleep , and leapt them over . 
 clarenc . the river hath thrice flow 'd , no ebb between ; 
 and the old folk , time 's dote chronicl , 
 say it did so a littl time befor 
 that our great grandsir , edward , sick 'd and die . 
 warwick . speak lower , princ , for the king recov . 
 princ humphrey . thi apoplexi will certain be hi end . 
 king . i pray you take me up , and bear me henc 
 into some other chamber . softli , pray . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 westminst . anoth chamber 
 
 the king lie on a bed ; clarenc , gloucest , warwick , 
 and other in attend 
 
 king . let there be no nois made , my gentl friend ; 
 unless some dull and favour hand 
 will whisper music to my weari spirit . 
 warwick . call for the music in the other room . 
 king . set me the crown upon my pillow here . 
 clarenc . hi eye is hollow , and he chang much . 
 warwick . less nois ! less nois ! 
 
 enter princ henri 
 
 princ . who saw the duke of clarenc ? 
 clarenc . i am here , brother , full of heavi . 
 princ . how now ! rain within door , and none abroad ! 
 how doth the king ? 
 princ humphrey . exceed ill. 
 princ . heard he the good news yet ? tell it him . 
 princ humphrey . he alt'r much upon the hear it . 
 princ . if he be sick with joy , he 'll recov without physic . 
 warwick . not so much nois , my lord . sweet princ , speak low ; 
 the king your father is dispo 'd to sleep . 
 clarenc . let us withdraw into the other room . 
 warwick . will't pleas your grace to go along with us ? 
 princ . no ; i will sit and watch here by the king . 
 exeunt all but the princ 
 whi doth the crown lie there upon hi pillow , 
 be so troublesom a bedfellow ? 
 o polish 'd perturb ! golden care ! 
 that keep'st the port of slumber open wide 
 to mani a watch night ! sleep with it now ! 
 yet not so sound and half so deepli sweet 
 as he whose brow with home biggen bound 
 snore out the watch of night . o majesti ! 
 when thou dost pinch thi bearer , thou dost sit 
 like a rich armour worn in heat of day 
 that scald'st with safeti . by hi gate of breath 
 there lie a downi feather which stir not . 
 did he suspir , that light and weightless down 
 perforc must move . my graciou lord ! my father ! 
 thi sleep is sound inde ; thi is a sleep 
 that from thi golden rigol hath divorc 'd 
 so mani english king . thi due from me 
 is tear and heavi sorrow of the blood 
 which natur , love , and filial tender , 
 shall , o dear father , pay thee plenteous . 
 my due from thee is thi imperi crown , 
 which , as immedi from thi place and blood , 
 deriv itself to me . [ put on the crown ] lo where it sits- 
 which god shall guard ; and put the world 's whole strength 
 into one giant arm , it shall not forc 
 thi lineal honour from me . thi from thee 
 will i to mine leav as 't is left to me . exit 
 king . warwick ! gloucest ! clarenc ! 
 
 re-ent warwick , gloucest , clarenc 
 
 clarenc . doth the king call ? 
 warwick . what would your majesti ? how fare your grace ? 
 king . whi did you leav me here alon , my lord ? 
 clarenc . we left the princ my brother here , my lieg , 
 who undertook to sit and watch by you . 
 king . the princ of wale ! where is he ? let me see him . 
 he is not here . 
 warwick . thi door is open ; he is gone thi way . 
 princ humphrey . he came not through the chamber where we stay 'd . 
 king . where is the crown ? who took it from my pillow ? 
 warwick . when we withdrew , my lieg , we left it here . 
 king . the princ hath ta'en it henc . go , seek him out . 
 is he so hasti that he doth suppos 
 my sleep my death ? 
 find him , my lord of warwick ; chide him hither . 
 exit warwick 
 thi part of hi conjoin with my diseas 
 and help to end me . see , son , what thing you are ! 
 how quickli natur fall into revolt 
 when gold becom her object ! 
 for thi the foolish over-car father 
 have broke their sleep with thought , 
 their brain with care , their bone with industri ; 
 for thi they have engross and pil 'd up 
 the cank'r heap of strange-achiev gold ; 
 for thi they have been thought to invest 
 their son with art and martial exercis ; 
 when , like the bee , toll from everi flower 
 the virtuou sweet , 
 our thigh with wax , our mouth with honey pack 'd , 
 we bring it to the hive , and , like the bee , 
 are murd'r for our pain . thi bitter tast 
 yield hi engross to the end father . 
 
 re-ent warwick 
 
 now where is he that will not stay so long 
 till hi friend sick hath determin 'd me ? 
 warwick . my lord , i found the princ in the next room , 
 wash with kindli tear hi gentl cheek , 
 with such a deep demeanour in great sorrow , 
 that tyranni , which never quaff 'd but blood , 
 would , by behold him , have wash 'd hi knife 
 with gentl eye-drop . he is come hither . 
 king . but wherefor did he take away the crown ? 
 
 re-ent princ henri 
 
 lo where he come . come hither to me , harri . 
 depart the chamber , leav us here alon . 
 exeunt all but the king and the princ 
 princ . i never thought to hear you speak again . 
 king . thi wish wa father , harri , to that thought . 
 i stay too long by thee , i weari thee . 
 dost thou so hunger for mine empti chair 
 that thou wilt need invest thee with my honour 
 befor thi hour be ripe ? o foolish youth ! 
 thou seek'st the great that will overwhelm thee . 
 stay but a littl , for my cloud of digniti 
 is held from fall with so weak a wind 
 that it will quickli drop ; my day is dim . 
 thou hast stol'n that which , after some few hour , 
 were thine without offens ; and at my death 
 thou hast seal 'd up my expect . 
 thi life did manifest thou lov'dst me not , 
 and thou wilt have me die assur 'd of it . 
 thou hid'st a thousand dagger in thi thought , 
 which thou hast whet on thi stoni heart , 
 to stab at half an hour of my life . 
 what , canst thou not forbear me half an hour ? 
 then get thee gone , and dig my grave thyself ; 
 and bid the merri bell ring to thine ear 
 that thou art crown , not that i am dead . 
 let all the tear that should bedew my hears 
 be drop of balm to sanctifi thi head ; 
 onli compound me with forgotten dust ; 
 give that which gave thee life unto the worm . 
 pluck down my offic , break my decre ; 
 for now a time is come to mock at form- 
 harri the fifth is crown 'd . up , vaniti : 
 down , royal state . all you sage counsellor , henc . 
 and to the english court assembl now , 
 from everi region , ape of idl . 
 now , neighbour confin , purg you of your scum . 
 have you a ruffian that will swear , drink , danc , 
 revel the night , rob , murder , and commit 
 the oldest sin the newest kind of way ? 
 be happi , he will troubl you no more . 
 england shall doubl gild hi trebl guilt ; 
 england shall give him offic , honour , might ; 
 for the fifth harri from curb 'd licens pluck 
 the muzzl of restraint , and the wild dog 
 shall flesh hi tooth on everi innoc . 
 o my poor kingdom , sick with civil blow ! 
 when that my care could not withhold thi riot , 
 what wilt thou do when riot is thi care ? 
 o , thou wilt be a wilder again . 
 peopl with wolv , thi old inhabit ! 
 princ . o , pardon me , my lieg ! but for my tear , 
 the moist impedi unto my speech , 
 i had forestal 'd thi dear and deep rebuk 
 ere you with grief had spoke and i had heard 
 the cours of it so far . there is your crown , 
 and he that wear the crown immort 
 long guard it your ! [ kneel ] if i affect it more 
 than as your honour and as your renown , 
 let me no more from thi obedi rise , 
 which my most inward true and duteou spirit 
 teacheth thi prostrat and exterior bend ! 
 god wit with me , when i here came in 
 and found no cours of breath within your majesti , 
 how cold it struck my heart ! if i do feign , 
 o , let me in my present wild die , 
 and never live to show th ' incredul world 
 the nobl chang that i have purpos ! 
 come to look on you , think you dead- 
 and dead almost , my lieg , to think you were- 
 i spake unto thi crown as have sens , 
 and thu upbraid it : 'the care on thee depend 
 hath fed upon the bodi of my father ; 
 therefor thou best of gold art worst of gold . 
 other , less fine in carat , is more preciou , 
 preserv life in med'cin potabl ; 
 but thou , most fine , most honour 'd , most renown 'd , 
 hast eat thi bearer up . ' thu , my most royal lieg , 
 accus it , i put it on my head , 
 to tri with it- as with an enemi 
 that had befor my face murd'r my father- 
 the quarrel of a true inheritor . 
 but if it did infect my blood with joy , 
 or swell my thought to ani strain of pride ; 
 if ani rebel or vain spirit of mine 
 did with the least affect of a welcom 
 give entertain to the might of it , 
 let god for ever keep it from my head , 
 and make me as the poorest vassal is , 
 that doth with awe and terror kneel to it ! 
 king . o my son , 
 god put it in thi mind to take it henc , 
 that thou mightst win the more thi father 's love , 
 plead so wise in excus of it ! 
 come hither , harri ; sit thou by my bed , 
 and hear , i think , the veri latest counsel 
 that ever i shall breath . god know , my son , 
 by what by-path and indirect crook 'd way 
 i met thi crown ; and i myself know well 
 how troublesom it sat upon my head : 
 to thee it shall descend with better quiet , 
 better opinion , better confirm ; 
 for all the soil of the achiev goe 
 with me into the earth . it seem 'd in me 
 but as an honour snatch 'd with boist'rou hand ; 
 and i had mani live to upbraid 
 my gain of it by their assist ; 
 which daili grew to quarrel and to bloodsh , 
 wound suppos peac . all these bold fear 
 thou seest with peril i have answer ; 
 for all my reign hath been but as a scene 
 act that argument . and now my death 
 chang the mood ; for what in me wa purcha 'd 
 fall upon thee in a more fairer sort ; 
 so thou the garland wear'st success . 
 yet , though thou stand'st more sure than i could do , 
 thou art not firm enough , sinc grief are green ; 
 and all my friend , which thou must make thi friend , 
 have but their sting and teeth newli ta'en out ; 
 by whose fell work i wa first advanc 'd , 
 and by whose power i well might lodg a fear 
 to be again displac 'd ; which to avoid , 
 i cut them off ; and had a purpos now 
 to lead out mani to the holi land , 
 lest rest and lie still might make them look 
 too near unto my state . therefor , my harri , 
 be it thi cours to busi giddi mind 
 with foreign quarrel , that action , henc born out , 
 may wast the memori of the former day . 
 more would i , but my lung are wast so 
 that strength of speech is utterli deni me . 
 how i came by the crown , o god , forgiv ; 
 and grant it may with thee in true peac live ! 
 princ . my graciou lieg , 
 you won it , wore it , kept it , gave it me ; 
 then plain and right must my possess be ; 
 which i with more than with a common pain 
 'gainst all the world will right maintain . 
 
 enter princ john of lancast , warwick , lord , and other 
 
 king . look , look , here come my john of lancast . 
 princ john . health , peac , and happi , to my royal father ! 
 king . thou bring'st me happi and peac , son john ; 
 but health , alack , with youth wing is flown 
 from thi bare wither 'd trunk . upon thi sight 
 my worldli busi make a period . 
 where is my lord of warwick ? 
 princ . my lord of warwick ! 
 king . doth ani name particular belong 
 unto the lodg where i first did swoon ? 
 warwick . 't is call 'd jerusalem , my nobl lord . 
 king . laud be to god ! even there my life must end . 
 it hath been prophesi to me mani year , 
 i should not die but in jerusalem ; 
 which vainli i suppo 'd the holi land . 
 but bear me to that chamber ; there i 'll lie ; 
 in that jerusalem shall harri die . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 gloucestershir . shallow 's hous 
 
 enter shallow , falstaff , bardolph , and page 
 
 shallow . by cock and pie , sir , you shall not away to-night . 
 what , davi , i say ! 
 falstaff . you must excus me , master robert shallow . 
 shallow . i will not excus you ; you shall not be excu 'd ; excus 
 shall not be admit ; there is no excus shall serv ; you shall 
 not be excu 'd . whi , davi ! 
 
 enter davi 
 
 davi . here , sir . 
 shallow . davi , davi , davi , davi ; let me see , davi ; let me see , 
 davi ; let me see- yea , marri , william cook , bid him come hither . 
 sir john , you shall not be excu 'd . 
 davi . marri , sir , thu : those precept can not be serv ; and , 
 again , sir- shall we sow the headland with wheat ? 
 shallow . with red wheat , davi . but for william cook- are there no 
 young pigeon ? 
 davi . ye , sir . here is now the smith 's note for shoe and 
 plough-iron . 
 shallow . let it be cast , and paid . sir john , you shall not be 
 excus . 
 davi . now , sir , a new link to the bucket must need be had ; and , 
 sir , do you mean to stop ani of william 's wage about the sack he 
 lost the other day at hinckley fair ? 
 shallow . ' a shall answer it . some pigeon , davi , a coupl of 
 short-legg 'd hen , a joint of mutton , and ani pretti littl tini 
 kickshaw , tell william cook . 
 davi . doth the man of war stay all night , sir ? 
 shallow . yea , davi ; i will use him well . a friend i ' th ' court is 
 better than a penni in purs . use hi men well , davi ; for they 
 are arrant knave and will backbit . 
 davi . no wors than they are backbitten , sir ; for they have 
 marvel foul linen . 
 shallow . well conceit , davy- about thi busi , davi . 
 davi . i beseech you , sir , to counten william visor of woncot 
 against clement perk o ' th ' hill . 
 shallow . there , is mani complaint , davi , against that visor . that 
 visor is an arrant knave , on my knowledg . 
 davi . i grant your worship that he is a knave , sir ; but yet god 
 forbid , sir , but a knave should have some counten at hi 
 friend 's request . an honest man , sir , is abl to speak for 
 himself , when a knave is not . i have serv 'd your worship truli , 
 sir , thi eight year ; an i can not onc or twice in a quarter 
 bear out a knave against an honest man , i have but a veri littl 
 credit with your worship . the knave is mine honest friend , sir ; 
 therefor , i beseech you , let him be countenanc 'd . 
 shallow . go to ; i say he shall have no wrong . look about , 
 davi . [ exit davi ] where are you , sir john ? come , come , come , off 
 with your boot . give me your hand , master bardolph . 
 bardolph . i am glad to see your worship . 
 shallow . i thank thee with all my heart , kind master bardolph . 
 [ to the page ] and welcom , my tall fellow . come , sir john . 
 falstaff . i 'll follow you , good master robert shallow . 
 [ exit shallow ] bardolph , look to our hors . [ exeunt bardolph 
 and page ] if i were saw into quantiti , i should make four 
 dozen of such beard hermit ' stave as master shallow . it is a 
 wonder thing to see the semblabl coher of hi men 's 
 spirit and hi . they , by observ of him , do bear themselv 
 like foolish justic : he , by convers with them , is turn 
 into a justice-lik serving-man . their spirit are so marri in 
 conjunct with the particip of societi that they flock 
 togeth in consent , like so mani wild gees . if i had a suit to 
 master shallow , i would humour hi men with the imput of 
 be near their master ; if to hi men , i would curri with master 
 shallow that no man could better command hi servant . it is 
 certain that either wise bear or ignor carriag is caught , 
 as men take diseas , one of anoth ; therefor let men take heed 
 of their compani . i will devis matter enough out of thi shallow 
 to keep princ harri in continu laughter the wear out of six 
 fashion , which is four term , or two action ; and ' a shall laugh 
 without intervallum . o , it is much that a lie with a slight 
 oath , and a jest with a sad brow will do with a fellow that never 
 had the ach in hi shoulder ! o , you shall see him laugh till 
 hi face be like a wet cloak ill laid up ! 
 shallow . [ within ] sir john ! 
 falstaff . i come , master shallow ; i come , master shallow . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 westminst . the palac 
 
 enter , sever , warwick , and the lord chief justic 
 
 warwick . how now , my lord chief justic ; whither away ? 
 chief justic . how doth the king ? 
 warwick . exceed well ; hi care are now all end . 
 chief justic . i hope , not dead . 
 warwick . he 's walk 'd the way of natur ; 
 and to our purpos he live no more . 
 chief justic . i would hi majesti had call 'd me with him . 
 the servic that i truli did hi life 
 hath left me open to all injuri . 
 warwick . inde , i think the young king love you not . 
 chief justic . i know he doth not , and do arm myself 
 to welcom the condit of the time , 
 which can not look more hideous upon me 
 than i have drawn it in my fantasi . 
 
 enter lancast , clarenc , gloucest , 
 westmoreland , and other 
 
 warwick . here come the heavi issu of dead harri . 
 o that the live harri had the temper 
 of he , the worst of these three gentlemen ! 
 how mani nobl then should hold their place 
 that must strike sail to spirit of vile sort ! 
 chief justic . o god , i fear all will be overturn 'd . 
 princ john . good morrow , cousin warwick , good morrow . 
 gloucest & clarenc . good morrow , cousin . 
 princ john . we meet like men that had forgot to speak . 
 warwick . we do rememb ; but our argument 
 is all too heavi to admit much talk . 
 princ john . well , peac be with him that hath made us heavi ! 
 chief justic . peac be with us , lest we be heavier ! 
 princ humphrey . o , good my lord , you have lost a friend inde ; 
 and i dare swear you borrow not that face 
 of seem sorrow- it is sure your own . 
 princ john . though no man be assur 'd what grace to find , 
 you stand in coldest expect . 
 i am the sorrier ; would 'twere otherwis . 
 clarenc . well , you must now speak sir john falstaff fair ; 
 which swim against your stream of qualiti . 
 chief justic . sweet princ , what i did , i did in honour , 
 led by th ' imparti conduct of my soul ; 
 and never shall you see that i will beg 
 a rag and forestal 'd remiss . 
 if truth and upright innoc fail me , 
 i 'll to the king my master that is dead , 
 and tell him who hath sent me after him . 
 warwick . here come the princ . 
 
 enter king henri the fifth , attend 
 
 chief justic . good morrow , and god save your majesti ! 
 king . thi new and gorgeou garment , majesti , 
 sit not so easi on me as you think . 
 brother , you mix your sad with some fear . 
 thi is the english , not the turkish court ; 
 not amurath an amurath succe , 
 but harri harri . yet be sad , good brother , 
 for , by my faith , it veri well becom you . 
 sorrow so royal in you appear 
 that i will deepli put the fashion on , 
 and wear it in my heart . whi , then , be sad ; 
 but entertain no more of it , good brother , 
 than a joint burden laid upon us all . 
 for me , by heaven , i bid you be assur 'd , 
 i 'll be your father and your brother too ; 
 let me but bear your love , i 'll bear your care . 
 yet weep that harri 's dead , and so will i ; 
 but harri live that shall convert those tear 
 by number into hour of happi . 
 brother . we hope no otherwis from your majesti . 
 king . you all look strang on me ; and you most . 
 you are , i think , assur 'd i love you not . 
 chief justic . i am assur 'd , if i be measur 'd rightli , 
 your majesti hath no just caus to hate me . 
 king . no ? 
 how might a princ of my great hope forget 
 so great indign you laid upon me ? 
 what , rate , rebuk , and roughli send to prison , 
 th ' immedi heir of england ! wa thi easi ? 
 may thi be wash 'd in leth and forgotten ? 
 chief justic . i then did use the person of your father ; 
 the imag of hi power lay then in me ; 
 and in th ' administr of hi law , 
 while i wa busi for the commonwealth , 
 your high pleas to forget my place , 
 the majesti and power of law and justic , 
 the imag of the king whom i present , 
 and struck me in my veri seat of judgment ; 
 whereon , as an offend to your father , 
 i gave bold way to my author 
 and did commit you . if the deed were ill , 
 be you content , wear now the garland , 
 to have a son set your decre at nought , 
 to pluck down justic from your aw bench , 
 to trip the cours of law , and blunt the sword 
 that guard the peac and safeti of your person ; 
 nay , more , to spurn at your most royal imag , 
 and mock your work in a second bodi . 
 question your royal thought , make the case your ; 
 be now the father , and propos a son ; 
 hear your own digniti so much profan 'd , 
 see your most dread law so loos slight , 
 behold yourself so by a son disdain 'd ; 
 and then imagin me take your part 
 and , in your power , soft silenc your son . 
 after thi cold consider , sentenc me ; 
 and , as you are a king , speak in your state 
 what i have done that misbecam my place , 
 my person , or my lieg 's sovereignti . 
 king . you are right , justic , and you weigh thi well ; 
 therefor still bear the balanc and the sword ; 
 and i do wish your honour may increas 
 till you do live to see a son of mine 
 offend you , and obey you , as i did . 
 so shall i live to speak my father 's word : 
 'happi am i that have a man so bold 
 that dare do justic on my proper son ; 
 and not less happi , have such a son 
 that would deliv up hi great so 
 into the hand of justic . ' you did commit me ; 
 for which i do commit into your hand 
 th ' unstain sword that you have us 'd to bear ; 
 with thi remembrance- that you use the same 
 with the like bold , just , and imparti spirit 
 as you have done 'gainst me . there is my hand . 
 you shall be as a father to my youth ; 
 my voic shall sound as you do prompt mine ear ; 
 and i will stoop and humbl my intent 
 to your well-practi 'd wise direct . 
 and , princ all , believ me , i beseech you , 
 my father is gone wild into hi grave , 
 for in hi tomb lie my affect ; 
 and with hi spirit sadli i surviv , 
 to mock the expect of the world , 
 to frustrat propheci , and to raze out 
 rotten opinion , who hath writ me down 
 after my seem . the tide of blood in me 
 hath proudli flow 'd in vaniti till now . 
 now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea , 
 where it shall mingl with the state of flood , 
 and flow henceforth in formal majesti . 
 now call we our high court of parliament ; 
 and let us choos such limb of nobl counsel , 
 that the great bodi of our state may go 
 in equal rank with the best govern 'd nation ; 
 that war , or peac , or both at onc , may be 
 as thing acquaint and familiar to us ; 
 in which you , father , shall have foremost hand . 
 our coron done , we will accit , 
 as i befor rememb'r , all our state ; 
 and- god consign to my good intents- 
 no princ nor peer shall have just caus to say , 
 god shorten harri 's happi life one day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 gloucestershir . shallow 's orchard 
 
 enter falstaff , shallow , silenc , bardolph , the page , and davi 
 
 shallow . nay , you shall see my orchard , where , in an arbour , we 
 will eat a last year 's pippin of mine own graf , with a dish 
 of caraway , and so forth . come , cousin silenc . and then to bed . 
 falstaff . fore god , you have here a goodli dwell and rich . 
 shallow . barren , barren , barren ; beggar all , beggar all , sir john 
 -marri , good air . spread , davi , spread , davi ; well said , davi . 
 falstaff . thi davi serv you for good use ; he is your 
 serving-man and your husband . 
 shallow . a good varlet , a good varlet , a veri good varlet , sir 
 john . by the mass , i have drunk too much sack at supper . a good 
 varlet . now sit down , now sit down ; come , cousin . 
 silenc . ah , sirrah ! quoth-a- we shall [ sing ] 
 
 do noth but eat and make good cheer , 
 and prais god for the merri year ; 
 when flesh is cheap and femal dear , 
 and lusti lad roam here and there , 
 so merrili , 
 and ever among so merrili . 
 
 falstaff . there 's a merri heart ! good master silenc , i 'll give you 
 a health for that anon . 
 shallow . give master bardolph some wine , davi . 
 davi . sweet sir , sit ; i 'll be with you anon ; most sweet sir , sit . 
 master page , good master page , sit . profac ! what you want in 
 meat , we 'll have in drink . but you must bear ; the heart 's all . 
 exit 
 shallow . be merri , master bardolph ; and , my littl soldier there , 
 be merri . 
 silenc . [ sing ] 
 
 be merri , be merri , my wife ha all ; 
 for women are shrew , both short and tall ; 
 't is merri in hall when beard wag an ; 
 and welcom merri shrove-tid . 
 be merri , be merri . 
 
 falstaff . i did not think master silenc had been a man of thi 
 mettl . 
 silenc . who , i ? i have been merri twice and onc ere now . 
 
 re-ent davi 
 
 davi . [ to bardolph ] there 's a dish of leather-coat for you . 
 shallow . davi ! 
 davi . your worship ! i 'll be with you straight . [ to bardolph ] 
 a cup of wine , sir ? 
 silenc . [ sing ] 
 
 a cup of wine that 's brisk and fine , 
 and drink unto the leman mine ; 
 and a merri heart live long-a . 
 
 falstaff . well said , master silenc . 
 silenc . an we shall be merri , now come in the sweet o ' th ' night . 
 falstaff . health and long life to you , master silenc ! 
 silenc . [ sing ] 
 
 fill the cup , and let it come , 
 i 'll pledg you a mile to th ' bottom . 
 
 shallow . honest bardolph , welcom ; if thou want'st anyth and 
 wilt not call , beshrew thi heart . welcom , my littl tini thief 
 and welcom inde too . i 'll drink to master bardolph , and to all 
 the cabilero about london . 
 davi . i hope to see london onc ere i die . 
 bardolph . an i might see you there , davi ! 
 shallow . by the mass , you ' r crack a quart together- ha ! will you 
 not , master bardolph ? 
 bardolph . yea , sir , in a pottle-pot . 
 shallow . by god 's liggen , i thank thee . the knave will stick by 
 thee , i can assur thee that . ' a will not out , ' a ; 't is true 
 bred . 
 bardolph . and i 'll stick by him , sir . 
 shallow . whi , there spoke a king . lack noth ; be merri . 
 [ one knock at door ] look who 's at door there , ho ! who knock ? 
 exit davi 
 falstaff . [ to silenc , who ha drunk a bumper ] whi , now you have 
 done me right . 
 silenc . [ sing ] 
 
 do me right , 
 and dub me knight . 
 samingo . 
 
 is't not so ? 
 falstaff . 't is so . 
 silenc . is't so ? whi then , say an old man can do somewhat . 
 
 re-ent davi 
 
 davi . a n't pleas your worship , there 's one pistol come from the 
 court with news . 
 falstaff . from the court ? let him come in . 
 
 enter pistol 
 
 how now , pistol ? 
 pistol . sir john , god save you ! 
 falstaff . what wind blew you hither , pistol ? 
 pistol . not the ill wind which blow no man to good . sweet knight , 
 thou art now one of the greatest men in thi realm . 
 silenc . by ' r ladi , i think ' a be , but goodman puff of barson . 
 pistol . puff ! 
 puff in thi teeth , most recreant coward base ! 
 sir john , i am thi pistol and thi friend , 
 and helter-skelt have i rode to thee ; 
 and tide do i bring , and lucki joy , 
 and golden time , and happi news of price . 
 falstaff . i pray thee now , deliv them like a man of thi world . 
 pistol . a foutra for the world and worldl base ! 
 i speak of africa and golden joy . 
 falstaff . o base assyrian knight , what is thi news ? 
 let king cophetua know the truth thereof . 
 silenc . [ sing ] and robin hood , scarlet , and john . 
 pistol . shall dunghil cur confront the helicon ? 
 and shall good news be baffl ? 
 then , pistol , lay thi head in furi ' lap . 
 shallow . honest gentleman , i know not your breed . 
 pistol . whi , then , lament therefor . 
 shallow . give me pardon , sir . if , sir , you come with news from the 
 court , i take it there 's but two ways- either to utter them or 
 conceal them . i am , sir , under the king , in some author . 
 pistol . under which king , bezonian ? speak , or die . 
 shallow . under king harri . 
 pistol . harri the fourth- or fifth ? 
 shallow . harri the fourth . 
 pistol . a foutra for thine offic ! 
 sir john , thi tender lambkin now is king ; 
 harri the fifth 's the man . i speak the truth . 
 when pistol lie , do thi ; and fig me , like 
 the brag spaniard . 
 falstaff . what , is the old king dead ? 
 pistol . as nail in door . the thing i speak are just . 
 falstaff . away , bardolph ! saddl my hors . master robert shallow , 
 choos what offic thou wilt in the land , 't is thine . pistol , i 
 will double-charg thee with digniti . 
 bardolph . o joy day ! 
 i would not take a knighthood for my fortun . 
 pistol . what , i do bring good news ? 
 falstaff . carri master silenc to bed . master shallow , my lord 
 shallow , be what thou wilt- i am fortun 's steward . get on thi 
 boot ; we 'll ride all night . o sweet pistol ! away , bardolph ! 
 [ exit bardolph ] come , pistol , utter more to me ; and withal 
 devis someth to do thyself good . boot , boot , master shallow ! 
 i know the young king is sick for me . let us take ani man 's 
 hors : the law of england are at my command . bless are 
 they that have been my friend ; and woe to my lord chief justic ! 
 pistol . let vultur vile seiz on hi lung also ! 
 'where is the life that late i led ? ' say they . 
 whi , here it is ; welcom these pleasant day ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 london . a street 
 
 enter beadl , drag in hostess quickli and doll tearsheet 
 
 hostess . no , thou arrant knave ; i would to god that i might die , 
 that i might have thee hang 'd . thou hast drawn my shoulder out of 
 joint . 
 first beadl . the constabl have deliv her over to me ; and she 
 shall have whipping-ch enough , i warrant her . there hath been 
 a man or two late kill 'd about her . 
 doll . nut-hook , nut-hook , you lie . come on ; i 'll tell thee what , 
 thou damn 'd tripe-visag 'd rascal , an the child i now go with do 
 miscarri , thou wert better thou hadst struck thi mother , thou 
 paper-fac 'd villain . 
 hostess . o the lord , that sir john were come ! he would make thi a 
 bloodi day to somebodi . but i pray god the fruit of her womb 
 miscarri ! 
 first beadl . if it do , you shall have a dozen of cushion again ; 
 you have but eleven now . come , i charg you both go with me ; for 
 the man is dead that you and pistol beat amongst you . 
 doll . i 'll tell you what , you thin man in a censer , i will have you 
 as soundli swing 'd for this- you blue-bottl rogu , you filthi 
 famish 'd correction , if you be not swing 'd , i 'll forswear 
 half-kirtl . 
 first beadl . come , come , you she knight-err , come . 
 hostess . o god , that right should thu overcom might ! 
 well , of suffer come eas . 
 doll . come , you rogu , come ; bring me to a justic . 
 hostess . ay , come , you starv 'd bloodhound . 
 doll . goodman death , goodman bone ! 
 hostess . thou atomi , thou ! 
 doll . come , you thin thing ! come , you rascal ! 
 first beadl . veri well . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 westminst . near the abbey 
 
 enter groom , strew rush 
 
 first groom . more rush , more rush ! 
 second groom . the trumpet have sound twice . 
 third groom . 'twill be two o'clock ere they come from the 
 coron . dispatch , dispatch . exeunt 
 
 trumpet sound , and the king and hi train pass 
 over the stage . after them enter falstaff , shallow , 
 pistol , bardolph , and page 
 
 falstaff . stand here by me , master robert shallow ; i will make the 
 king do you grace . i will leer upon him , as ' a come by ; and do 
 but mark the counten that he will give me . 
 pistol . god bless thi lung , good knight ! 
 falstaff . come here , pistol ; stand behind me . [ to shallow ] o , if 
 i had had to have made new liveri , i would have bestow the 
 thousand pound i borrow of you . but 't is no matter ; thi poor 
 show doth better ; thi doth infer the zeal i had to see him . 
 shallow . it doth so . 
 falstaff . it show my earnest of affection- 
 shallow . it doth so . 
 falstaff . my devotion- 
 shallow . it doth , it doth , it doth . 
 falstaff . as it were , to ride day and night ; and not to deliber , 
 not to rememb , not to have patienc to shift me- 
 shallow . it is best , certain . 
 falstaff . but to stand stain with travel , and sweat with 
 desir to see him ; think of noth els , put all affair 
 els in oblivion , as if there were noth els to be done but to 
 see him . 
 pistol . 't is 'semper idem ' for 'obsqu hoc nihil est . ' 't is all in 
 everi part . 
 shallow . 't is so , inde . 
 pistol . my knight , i will inflam thi nobl liver 
 and make thee rage . 
 thi doll , and helen of thi nobl thought , 
 is in base duranc and contagi prison ; 
 hal 'd thither 
 by most mechan and dirti hand . 
 rous up reveng from ebon den with fell alecto 's snake , 
 for doll is in . pistol speak nought but truth . 
 falstaff . i will deliv her . 
 [ shout , within , and the trumpet sound ] 
 pistol . there roar 'd the sea , and trumpet-clangor sound . 
 
 enter the king and hi train , the lord chief justic 
 among them 
 
 falstaff . god save thi grace , king hal ; my royal hal ! 
 pistol . the heaven thee guard and keep , most royal imp of fame ! 
 falstaff . god save thee , my sweet boy ! 
 king . my lord chief justic , speak to that vain man . 
 chief justic . have you your wit ? know you what 't is you speak ? 
 falstaff . my king ! my jove ! i speak to thee , my heart ! 
 king . i know thee not , old man . fall to thi prayer . 
 how ill white hair becom a fool and jester ! 
 i have long dreamt of such a kind of man , 
 so surfeit-swel 'd , so old , and so profan ; 
 but be awak 'd , i do despis my dream . 
 make less thi bodi henc , and more thi grace ; 
 leav gormand ; know the grave doth gape 
 for thee thrice wider than for other men- 
 repli not to me with a fool-born jest ; 
 presum not that i am the thing i wa , 
 for god doth know , so shall the world perceiv , 
 that i have turn 'd away my former self ; 
 so will i those that kept me compani . 
 when thou dost hear i am as i have been , 
 approach me , and thou shalt be as thou wast , 
 the tutor and the feeder of my riot . 
 till then i banish thee , on pain of death , 
 as i have done the rest of my mislead , 
 not to come near our person by ten mile . 
 for compet of life i will allow you , 
 that lack of mean enforc you not to evil ; 
 and , as we hear you do reform yourselv , 
 we will , accord to your strength and qualiti , 
 give you advanc . be it your charg , my lord , 
 to see perform 'd the tenour of our word . 
 set on . exeunt the king and hi train 
 falstaff . master shallow , i owe you a thousand pound . 
 shallow . yea , marri , sir john ; which i beseech you to let me have 
 home with me . 
 falstaff . that can hardli be , master shallow . do not you griev at 
 thi ; i shall be sent for in privat to him . look you , he must 
 seem thu to the world . fear not your advanc ; i will be the 
 man yet that shall make you great . 
 shallow . i can not perceiv how , unless you give me your doublet , 
 and stuff me out with straw . i beseech you , good sir john , let me 
 have five hundr of my thousand . 
 falstaff . sir , i will be as good as my word . thi that you heard 
 wa but a colour . 
 shallow . a colour that i fear you will die in , sir john . 
 falstaff . fear no colour ; go with me to dinner . come , lieuten 
 pistol ; come , bardolph . i shall be sent for soon at night . 
 
 re-ent princ john , the lord chief justic , 
 with offic 
 
 chief justic . go , carri sir john falstaff to the fleet ; 
 take all hi compani along with him . 
 falstaff . my lord , my lord- 
 chief justic . i can not now speak . i will hear you soon . 
 take them away . 
 pistol . si fortuna me tormenta , spero me contenta . 
 exeunt all but princ john and the lord chief justic 
 princ john . i like thi fair proceed of the king 's . 
 he hath intent hi wont follow 
 shall all be veri well provid for ; 
 but all are banish 'd till their convers 
 appear more wise and modest to the world . 
 chief justic . and so they are . 
 princ john . the king hath call 'd hi parliament , my lord . 
 chief justic . he hath . 
 princ john . i will lay odd that , ere thi year expir , 
 we bear our civil sword and nativ fire 
 as far as franc . i heard a bird so sing , 
 whose music , to my think , plea 'd the king . 
 come , will you henc ? exeunt 
 
 epilogu 
 epilogu . 
 
 first my fear , then my curtsi , last my speech . my fear , is your 
 displeasur ; my curtsi , my duti ; and my speech , to beg your pardon . 
 if you look for a good speech now , you undo me ; for what i have to say 
 is of mine own make ; and what , inde , i should say will , i doubt , 
 prove mine own mar . but to the purpos , and so to the ventur . 
 be it known to you , as it is veri well , i wa late here in the end 
 of a displeas play , to pray your patienc for it and to promis you 
 a better . i meant , inde , to pay you with thi ; which if like an 
 ill ventur it come unluckili home , i break , and you , my gentl 
 creditor , lose . here i promi 'd you i would be , and here i commit 
 my bodi to your merci . bate me some , and i will pay you some , and , 
 as most debtor do , promis you infinit ; and so i kneel down befor 
 you- but , inde , to pray for the queen . 
 if my tongu can not entreat you to acquit me , will you command me to 
 use my leg ? and yet that were but light payment-to danc out of 
 your debt . but a good conscienc will make ani possibl 
 satisfact , and so would i. all the gentlewomen here have forgiven 
 me . if the gentlemen will not , then the gentlemen do not agre with 
 the gentlewomen , which wa never seen befor in such an assembl . 
 one word more , i beseech you . if you be not too much cloy 'd with fat 
 meat , our humbl author will continu the stori , with sir john in 
 it , and make you merri with fair katherin of franc ; where , for 
 anyth i know , falstaff shall die of a sweat , unless alreadi ' a be 
 kill with your hard opinion ; for oldcastl die a martyr and thi 
 is not the man . my tongu is weari ; when my leg are too , i will bid 
 you good night . 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the life of king henri the fifth 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 person in the induct 
 a lord 
 christoph sli , a tinker 
 hostess 
 page 
 player 
 huntsmen 
 servant 
 
 baptista minola , a gentleman of padua 
 vincentio , a merchant of pisa 
 lucentio , son to vincentio , in love with bianca 
 petruchio , a gentleman of verona , a suitor to katherina 
 
 suitor to bianca 
 gremio 
 hortensio 
 
 servant to lucentio 
 tranio 
 biondello 
 
 servant to petruchio 
 grumio 
 curti 
 
 a pedant 
 
 daughter to baptista 
 katherina , the shrew 
 bianca 
 
 a widow 
 
 tailor , haberdash , and servant attend on baptista and 
 petruchio 
 
 scene : 
 padua , and petruchio 's hous in the countri 
 
 sc_ < num > 
 induct . scene i . 
 befor an alehous on a heath 
 
 enter hostess and sli 
 
 sli . i 'll pheez you , in faith . 
 hostess . a pair of stock , you rogu ! 
 sli . y'are a baggag ; the sli are no rogu . look in the 
 chronicl : we came in with richard conqueror . therefor , pauca 
 pallabri ; let the world slide . sessa ! 
 hostess . you will not pay for the glass you have burst ? 
 sli . no , not a denier . go by , saint jeronimi , go to thi cold bed 
 and warm thee . 
 hostess . i know my remedi ; i must go fetch the third-borough . 
 exit 
 sli . third , or fourth , or fifth borough , i 'll answer him by law . 
 i 'll not budg an inch , boy ; let him come , and kindli . 
 [ fall asleep ] 
 
 wind horn . enter a lord from bunt , with hi train 
 
 lord . huntsman , i charg thee , tender well my hound ; 
 brach merriman , the poor cur , is emboss 'd ; 
 and coupl clowder with the deep-mouth 'd brach . 
 saw'st thou not , boy , how silver made it good 
 at the hedg corner , in the coldest fault ? 
 i would not lose the dog for twenti pound . 
 first huntsman . whi , belman is as good as he , my lord ; 
 he cri upon it at the merest loss , 
 and twice to-day pick 'd out the dullest scent ; 
 trust me , i take him for the better dog . 
 lord . thou art a fool ; if echo were as fleet , 
 i would esteem him worth a dozen such . 
 but sup them well , and look unto them all ; 
 to-morrow i intend to hunt again . 
 first huntsman . i will , my lord . 
 lord . what 's here ? one dead , or drunk ? 
 see , doth he breath ? 
 second huntsman . he breath , my lord . were he not warm 'd with ale , 
 thi were a bed but cold to sleep so soundli . 
 lord . o monstrou beast , how like a swine he lie ! 
 grim death , how foul and loathsom is thine imag ! 
 sir , i will practis on thi drunken man . 
 what think you , if he were convey 'd to bed , 
 wrapp 'd in sweet cloth , ring put upon hi finger , 
 a most delici banquet by hi bed , 
 and brave attend near him when he wake , 
 would not the beggar then forget himself ? 
 first huntsman . believ me , lord , i think he can not choos . 
 second huntsman . it would seem strang unto him when he wak 'd . 
 lord . even as a flatt'r dream or worthless fanci . 
 then take him up , and manag well the jest : 
 carri him gentli to my fairest chamber , 
 and hang it round with all my wanton pictur ; 
 balm hi foul head in warm distil water , 
 and burn sweet wood to make the lodg sweet ; 
 procur me music readi when he wake , 
 to make a dulcet and a heavenli sound ; 
 and if he chanc to speak , be readi straight , 
 and with a low submiss rever 
 say 'what is it your honour will command ? ' 
 let one attend him with a silver basin 
 full of rose-wat and bestrew 'd with flower ; 
 anoth bear the ewer , the third a diaper , 
 and say 'will't pleas your lordship cool your hand ? ' 
 some one be readi with a costli suit , 
 and ask him what apparel he will wear ; 
 anoth tell him of hi hound and hors , 
 and that hi ladi mourn at hi diseas ; 
 persuad him that he hath been lunat , 
 and , when he say he is , say that he dream , 
 for he is noth but a mighti lord . 
 thi do , and do it kindli , gentl sir ; 
 it will be pastim pass excel , 
 if it be husband with modesti . 
 first huntsman . my lord , i warrant you we will play our part 
 as he shall think by our true dilig 
 he is no less than what we say he is . 
 lord . take him up gentli , and to bed with him ; 
 and each one to hi offic when he wake . 
 [ sli is carri out . a trumpet sound ] 
 sirrah , go see what trumpet 't is that sounds- 
 exit servant 
 belik some nobl gentleman that mean , 
 travel some journey , to repos him here . 
 
 re-ent a servingman 
 
 how now ! who is it ? 
 servant . a n't pleas your honour , player 
 that offer servic to your lordship . 
 lord . bid them come near . 
 
 enter player 
 
 now , fellow , you are welcom . 
 player . we thank your honour . 
 lord . do you intend to stay with me to-night ? 
 player . so pleas your lordship to accept our duti . 
 lord . with all my heart . thi fellow i rememb 
 sinc onc he play 'd a farmer 's eldest son ; 
 't wa where you woo 'd the gentlewoman so well . 
 i have forgot your name ; but , sure , that part 
 wa aptli fit and natur perform 'd . 
 player . i think 't wa soto that your honour mean . 
 lord . 't is veri true ; thou didst it excel . 
 well , you are come to me in happi time , 
 the rather for i have some sport in hand 
 wherein your cun can assist me much . 
 there is a lord will hear you play to-night ; 
 but i am doubt of your modesti , 
 lest , over-ey of hi odd behaviour , 
 for yet hi honour never heard a play , 
 you break into some merri passion 
 and so offend him ; for i tell you , sir , 
 if you should smile , he grow impati . 
 player . fear not , my lord ; we can contain ourselv , 
 were he the veriest antic in the world . 
 lord . go , sirrah , take them to the butteri , 
 and give them friendli welcom everi one ; 
 let them want noth that my hous afford . 
 exit one with the player 
 sirrah , go you to bartholomew my page , 
 and see him dress 'd in all suit like a ladi ; 
 that done , conduct him to the drunkard 's chamber , 
 and call him 'madam , ' do him obeis . 
 tell him from me- as he will win my love- 
 he bear himself with honour action , 
 such as he hath observ 'd in nobl ladi 
 unto their lord , by them accomplish ; 
 such duti to the drunkard let him do , 
 with soft low tongu and lowli courtesi , 
 and say 'what is't your honour will command , 
 wherein your ladi and your humbl wife 
 may show her duti and make known her love ? ' 
 and then with kind embrac , tempt kiss , 
 and with declin head into hi bosom , 
 bid him shed tear , as be overjoy 
 to see her nobl lord restor 'd to health , 
 who for thi seven year hath esteem him 
 no better than a poor and loathsom beggar . 
 and if the boy have not a woman 's gift 
 to rain a shower of command tear , 
 an onion will do well for such a shift , 
 which , in a napkin be close convey 'd , 
 shall in despit enforc a wateri eye . 
 see thi dispatch 'd with all the hast thou canst ; 
 anon i 'll give thee more instruct . exit a servingman 
 i know the boy will well usurp the grace , 
 voic , gait , and action , of a gentlewoman ; 
 i long to hear him call the drunkard 'husband ' ; 
 and how my men will stay themselv from laughter 
 when they do homag to thi simpl peasant . 
 i 'll in to counsel them ; hapli my presenc 
 may well abat the over-merri spleen , 
 which otherwis would grow into extrem . exeunt 
 
 sc_ < num > 
 scene ii . 
 a bedchamb in the lord 's hous 
 
 enter aloft sli , with attend ; some with apparel , basin 
 and ewer , and other appurten ; and lord 
 
 sli . for god 's sake , a pot of small ale . 
 first servant . will't pleas your lordship drink a cup of sack ? 
 second servant . will't pleas your honour tast of these conserv ? 
 third servant . what raiment will your honour wear to-day ? 
 sli . i am christophero sli ; call not me 'honour ' nor 'lordship . ' i 
 ne'er drank sack in my life ; and if you give me ani conserv , 
 give me conserv of beef . ne'er ask me what raiment i 'll wear , 
 for i have no more doublet than back , no more stock than 
 leg , nor no more shoe than feet- nay , sometim more feet than 
 shoe , or such shoe as my toe look through the overleath . 
 lord . heaven ceas thi idl humour in your honour ! 
 o , that a mighti man of such descent , 
 of such possess , and so high esteem , 
 should be infus with so foul a spirit ! 
 sli . what , would you make me mad ? am not i christoph sli , old 
 sli 's son of burton heath ; by birth a pedlar , by educ a 
 cardmak , by transmut a bear-herd , and now by present 
 profess a tinker ? ask marian hacket , the fat ale-wif of 
 wincot , if she know me not ; if she say i am not fourteen penc on 
 the score for sheer ale , score me up for the lying'st knave in 
 christendom . what ! i am not bestraught . [ take a pot of ale ] 
 here's- 
 third servant . o , thi it is that make your ladi mourn ! 
 second servant . o , thi is it that make your servant droop ! 
 lord . henc come it that your kindr shun your hous , 
 as beaten henc by your strang lunaci . 
 o nobl lord , bethink thee of thi birth ! 
 call home thi ancient thought from banish , 
 and banish henc these abject lowli dream . 
 look how thi servant do attend on thee , 
 each in hi offic readi at thi beck . 
 wilt thou have music ? hark ! apollo play , [ music ] 
 and twenti cage nightingal do sing . 
 or wilt thou sleep ? we 'll have thee to a couch 
 softer and sweeter than the lust bed 
 on purpos trimm 'd up for semirami . 
 say thou wilt walk : we will bestrew the ground . 
 or wilt thou ride ? thi hors shall be trapp 'd , 
 their har stud all with gold and pearl . 
 dost thou love hawk ? thou hast hawk will soar 
 abov the morn lark . or wilt thou hunt ? 
 thi hound shall make the welkin answer them 
 and fetch shall echo from the hollow earth . 
 first servant . say thou wilt cours ; thi greyhound are as swift 
 as breath stag ; ay , fleeter than the roe . 
 second servant . dost thou love pictur ? we will fetch thee 
 straight 
 adoni paint by a run brook , 
 and cytherea all in sedg hid , 
 which seem to move and wanton with her breath 
 even as the wave sedg play wi ' th ' wind . 
 lord . we 'll show thee lo as she wa a maid 
 and how she wa beguil and surpri 'd , 
 as live paint as the deed wa done . 
 third servant . or daphn roam through a thorni wood , 
 scratch her leg , that one shall swear she bleed 
 and at that sight shall sad apollo weep , 
 so workmanli the blood and tear are drawn . 
 lord . thou art a lord , and noth but a lord . 
 thou hast a ladi far more beauti 
 than ani woman in thi wane age . 
 first servant . and , till the tear that she hath shed for thee 
 like enviou flood o'er-run her love face , 
 she wa the fairest creatur in the world ; 
 and yet she is inferior to none . 
 sli . am i a lord and have i such a ladi ? 
 or do i dream ? or have i dream 'd till now ? 
 i do not sleep : i see , i hear , i speak ; 
 i smell sweet savour , and i feel soft thing . 
 upon my life , i am a lord inde , 
 and not a tinker , nor christoph sli . 
 well , bring our ladi hither to our sight ; 
 and onc again , a pot o ' th ' smallest ale . 
 second servant . will't pleas your mighti to wash your hand ? 
 o , how we joy to see your wit restor 'd ! 
 o , that onc more you knew but what you are ! 
 these fifteen year you have been in a dream ; 
 or , when you wak 'd , so wak 'd as if you slept . 
 sli . these fifteen year ! by my fay , a goodli nap . 
 but did i never speak of all that time ? 
 first servant . o , ye , my lord , but veri idl word ; 
 for though you lay here in thi goodli chamber , 
 yet would you say ye were beaten out of door ; 
 and rail upon the hostess of the hous , 
 and say you would present her at the leet , 
 becaus she brought stone jug and no seal 'd quart . 
 sometim you would call out for cice hacket . 
 sli . ay , the woman 's maid of the hous . 
 third servant . whi , sir , you know no hous nor no such maid , 
 nor no such men as you have reckon 'd up , 
 as stephen sli , and old john nap of greec , 
 and peter turph , and henri pimpernel ; 
 and twenti more such name and men as these , 
 which never were , nor no man ever saw . 
 sli . now , lord be thank for my good amend ! 
 all . amen . 
 
 enter the page as a ladi , with attend 
 
 sli . i thank thee ; thou shalt not lose by it . 
 page . how fare my nobl lord ? 
 sli . marri , i fare well ; for here is cheer enough . 
 where is my wife ? 
 page . here , nobl lord ; what is thi will with her ? 
 sli . are you my wife , and will not call me husband ? 
 my men should call me 'lord ' ; i am your goodman . 
 page . my husband and my lord , my lord and husband ; 
 i am your wife in all obedi . 
 sli . i know it well . what must i call her ? 
 lord . madam . 
 sli . al'c madam , or joan madam ? 
 lord . madam , and noth els ; so lord call ladi . 
 sli . madam wife , they say that i have dream 'd 
 and slept abov some fifteen year or more . 
 page . ay , and the time seem thirti unto me , 
 be all thi time abandon 'd from your bed . 
 sli . 't is much . servant , leav me and her alon . 
 exeunt servant 
 madam , undress you , and come now to bed . 
 page . thrice nobl lord , let me entreat of you 
 to pardon me yet for a night or two ; 
 or , if not so , until the sun be set . 
 for your physician have expressli charg 'd , 
 in peril to incur your former maladi , 
 that i should yet absent me from your bed . 
 i hope thi reason stand for my excus . 
 sli . ay , it stand so that i may hardli tarri so long . but i would 
 be loath to fall into my dream again . i will therefor tarri in 
 despit of the flesh and the blood . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . your honour 's player , hear your amend , 
 are come to play a pleasant comedi ; 
 for so your doctor hold it veri meet , 
 see too much sad hath congeal 'd your blood , 
 and melancholi is the nurs of frenzi . 
 therefor they thought it good you hear a play 
 and frame your mind to mirth and merriment , 
 which bar a thousand harm and lengthen life . 
 sli . marri , i will ; let them play it . is not a comonti a 
 christma gambold or a tumbling-trick ? 
 page . no , my good lord , it is more pleas stuff . 
 sli . what , household stuff ? 
 page . it is a kind of histori . 
 sli . well , we 'll see't . come , madam wife , sit by my side and let 
 the world slip ; -we shall ne'er be younger . 
 [ they sit down ] 
 
 a flourish of trumpet announc the play 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 padua . a public place 
 
 enter lucentio and hi man tranio 
 
 lucentio . tranio , sinc for the great desir i had 
 to see fair padua , nurseri of art , 
 i am arriv 'd for fruit lombardi , 
 the pleasant garden of great itali , 
 and by my father 's love and leav am arm 'd 
 with hi good will and thi good compani , 
 my trusti servant well approv 'd in all , 
 here let us breath , and hapli institut 
 a cours of learn and ingeni studi . 
 pisa , renown for grave citizen , 
 gave me my be and my father first , 
 a merchant of great traffic through the world , 
 vincentio , come of the bentivolii ; 
 vincentio 's son , brought up in florenc , 
 it shall becom to serv all hope conceiv 'd , 
 to deck hi fortun with hi virtuou deed . 
 and therefor , tranio , for the time i studi , 
 virtu and that part of philosophi 
 will i appli that treat of happi 
 by virtu special to be achiev 'd . 
 tell me thi mind ; for i have pisa left 
 and am to padua come as he that leav 
 a shallow plash to plung him in the deep , 
 and with satieti seek to quench hi thirst . 
 tranio . mi perdonato , gentl master mine ; 
 i am in all affect as yourself ; 
 glad that you thu continu your resolv 
 to suck the sweet of sweet philosophi . 
 onli , good master , while we do admir 
 thi virtu and thi moral disciplin , 
 let 's be no stoic nor no stock , i pray , 
 or so devot to aristotl 's check 
 as ovid be an outcast quit abjur 'd . 
 balk logic with acquaint that you have , 
 and practis rhetor in your common talk ; 
 music and poesi use to quicken you ; 
 the mathemat and the metaphys , 
 fall to them as you find your stomach serv you . 
 no profit grow where is no pleasur ta'en ; 
 in brief , sir , studi what you most affect . 
 lucentio . gramerci , tranio , well dost thou advis . 
 if , biondello , thou wert come ashor , 
 we could at onc put us in readi , 
 and take a lodg fit to entertain 
 such friend as time in padua shall beget . 
 
 enter baptista with hi two daughter , katherina 
 and bianca ; gremio , a pantaloon ; hortensio , 
 suitor to bianca . lucentio and tranio stand by 
 
 but stay awhil ; what compani is thi ? 
 tranio . master , some show to welcom us to town . 
 baptista . gentlemen , importun me no farther , 
 for how i firmli am resolv 'd you know ; 
 that is , not to bestow my youngest daughter 
 befor i have a husband for the elder . 
 if either of you both love katherina , 
 becaus i know you well and love you well , 
 leav shall you have to court her at your pleasur . 
 gremio . to cart her rather . she 's too rough for me . 
 there , there , hortensio , will you ani wife ? 
 katherina . [ to baptista ] i pray you , sir , is it your will 
 to make a stale of me amongst these mate ? 
 hortensio . mate , maid ! how mean you that ? no mate for you , 
 unless you were of gentler , milder mould . 
 katherina . i ' faith , sir , you shall never need to fear ; 
 iwi it is not halfway to her heart ; 
 but if it were , doubt not her care should be 
 to comb your noddl with a three-legg 'd stool , 
 and paint your face , and use you like a fool . 
 hortensio . from all such devil , good lord deliv us ! 
 gremio . and me , too , good lord ! 
 tranio . husht , master ! here 's some good pastim toward ; 
 that wench is stark mad or wonder froward . 
 lucentio . but in the other 's silenc do i see 
 maid 's mild behaviour and sobrieti . 
 peac , tranio ! 
 tranio . well said , master ; mum ! and gaze your fill . 
 baptista . gentlemen , that i may soon make good 
 what i have said- bianca , get you in ; 
 and let it not displeas thee , good bianca , 
 for i will love thee ne'er the less , my girl . 
 katherina . a pretti peat ! it is best 
 put finger in the eye , an she knew whi . 
 bianca . sister , content you in my discont . 
 sir , to your pleasur humbl i subscrib ; 
 my book and instrument shall be my compani , 
 on them to look , and practis by myself . 
 lucentio . hark , tranio , thou mayst hear minerva speak ! 
 hortensio . signior baptista , will you be so strang ? 
 sorri am i that our good will effect 
 bianca 's grief . 
 gremio . whi will you mew her up , 
 signior baptista , for thi fiend of hell , 
 and make her bear the penanc of her tongu ? 
 baptista . gentlemen , content ye ; i am resolv 'd . 
 go in , bianca . exit bianca 
 and for i know she taketh most delight 
 in music , instrument , and poetri , 
 schoolmast will i keep within my hous 
 fit to instruct her youth . if you , hortensio , 
 or , signior gremio , you , know ani such , 
 prefer them hither ; for to cun men 
 i will be veri kind , and liber 
 to mine own children in good bringing-up ; 
 and so , farewel . katherina , you may stay ; 
 for i have more to commun with bianca . exit 
 katherina . whi , and i trust i may go too , may i not ? 
 what ! shall i be appoint hour , as though , belik , 
 i knew not what to take and what to leav ? ha ! exit 
 gremio . you may go to the devil 's dam ; your gift are so good 
 here 's none will hold you . there ! love is not so great , 
 hortensio , but we may blow our nail togeth , and fast it fairli 
 out ; our cake 's dough on both side . farewel ; yet , for the love 
 i bear my sweet bianca , if i can by ani mean light on a fit man 
 to teach her that wherein she delight , i will wish him to her 
 father . 
 hortensio . so will i , signior gremio ; but a word , i pray . though 
 the natur of our quarrel yet never brook 'd parl , know now , upon 
 advic , it toucheth us both- that we may yet again have access to 
 our fair mistress , and be happi rival in bianca 's love- to 
 labour and effect one thing special . 
 gremio . what 's that , i pray ? 
 hortensio . marri , sir , to get a husband for her sister . 
 gremio . a husband ? a devil . 
 hortensio . i say a husband . 
 gremio . i say a devil . think'st thou , hortensio , though her father 
 be veri rich , ani man is so veri a fool to be marri to hell ? 
 hortensio . tush , gremio ! though it pass your patienc and mine to 
 endur her loud alarum , whi , man , there be good fellow in the 
 world , an a man could light on them , would take her with all 
 fault , and money enough . 
 gremio . i can not tell ; but i had as lief take her dowri with thi 
 condit : to be whipp 'd at the high cross everi morn . 
 hortensio . faith , as you say , there 's small choic in rotten 
 appl . but , come ; sinc thi bar in law make us friend , it 
 shall be so far forth friendli maintain 'd till by help 
 baptista 's eldest daughter to a husband we set hi youngest free 
 for a husband , and then have to't afresh . sweet bianca ! happi man 
 be hi dole ! he that run fastest get the ring . how say you , 
 signior gremio ? 
 gremio . i am agre ; and would i had given him the best hors in 
 padua to begin hi woo that would thoroughli woo her , wed her , 
 and bed her , and rid the hous of her ! come on . 
 exeunt gremio and hortensio 
 tranio . i pray , sir , tell me , is it possibl 
 that love should of a sudden take such hold ? 
 lucentio . o tranio , till i found it to be true , 
 i never thought it possibl or like . 
 but see ! while idli i stood look on , 
 i found the effect of love in idl ; 
 and now in plain do confess to thee , 
 that art to me as secret and as dear 
 as anna to the queen of carthag was- 
 tranio , i burn , i pine , i perish , tranio , 
 if i achiev not thi young modest girl . 
 counsel me , tranio , for i know thou canst ; 
 assist me , tranio , for i know thou wilt . 
 tranio . master , it is no time to chide you now ; 
 affect is not rate from the heart ; 
 if love have touch 'd you , nought remain but so : 
 'redim te captum quam quea minimo . ' 
 lucentio . gramerci , lad . go forward ; thi content ; 
 the rest will comfort , for thi counsel 's sound . 
 tranio . master , you look 'd so longli on the maid . 
 perhap you mark 'd not what 's the pith of all . 
 lucentio . o , ye , i saw sweet beauti in her face , 
 such as the daughter of agenor had , 
 that made great jove to humbl him to her hand , 
 when with hi knee he kiss 'd the cretan strand . 
 tranio . saw you no more ? mark 'd you not how her sister 
 began to scold and rais up such a storm 
 that mortal ear might hardli endur the din ? 
 lucentio . tranio , i saw her coral lip to move , 
 and with her breath she did perfum the air ; 
 sacr and sweet wa all i saw in her . 
 tranio . nay , then 't is time to stir him from hi tranc . 
 i pray , awak , sir . if you love the maid , 
 bend thought and wit to achiev her . thu it stand : 
 her elder sister is so curst and shrewd 
 that , till the father rid hi hand of her , 
 master , your love must live a maid at home ; 
 and therefor ha he close mew 'd her up , 
 becaus she will not be annoy 'd with suitor . 
 lucentio . ah , tranio , what a cruel father 's he ! 
 but art thou not advi 'd he took some care 
 to get her cun schoolmast to instruct her ? 
 tranio . ay , marri , am i , sir , and now 't is plot . 
 lucentio . i have it , tranio . 
 tranio . master , for my hand , 
 both our invent meet and jump in one . 
 lucentio . tell me thine first . 
 tranio . you will be schoolmast , 
 and undertak the teach of the maid- 
 that 's your devic . 
 lucentio . it is . may it be done ? 
 tranio . not possibl ; for who shall bear your part 
 and be in padua here vincentio 's son ; 
 keep hous and pli hi book , welcom hi friend , 
 visit hi countrymen , and banquet them ? 
 lucentio . basta , content thee , for i have it full . 
 we have not yet been seen in ani hous , 
 nor can we be distinguish 'd by our face 
 for man or master . then it follow thu : 
 thou shalt be master , tranio , in my stead , 
 keep hous and port and servant , as i should ; 
 i will some other be- some florentin , 
 some neapolitan , or meaner man of pisa . 
 't is hatch 'd , and shall be so . tranio , at onc 
 uncas thee ; take my colour 'd hat and cloak . 
 when biondello come , he wait on thee ; 
 but i will charm him first to keep hi tongu . 
 tranio . so had you need . [ they exchang habit ] 
 in brief , sir , sith it your pleasur is , 
 and i am tie to be obedient- 
 for so your father charg 'd me at our part : 
 'be servic to my son ' quoth he , 
 although i think 't wa in anoth sense- 
 i am content to be lucentio , 
 becaus so well i love lucentio . 
 lucentio . tranio , be so becaus lucentio love ; 
 and let me be a slave t ' achiev that maid 
 whose sudden sight hath thrall 'd my wound eye . 
 
 enter biondello . 
 
 here come the rogu . sirrah , where have you been ? 
 biondello . where have i been ! nay , how now ! where are you ? 
 master , ha my fellow tranio stol'n your cloth ? 
 or you stol'n hi ? or both ? pray , what 's the news ? 
 lucentio . sirrah , come hither ; 't is no time to jest , 
 and therefor frame your manner to the time . 
 your fellow tranio here , to save my life , 
 put my apparel and my count'nanc on , 
 and i for my escap have put on hi ; 
 for in a quarrel sinc i came ashor 
 i kill 'd a man , and fear i wa descri . 
 wait you on him , i charg you , as becom , 
 while i make way from henc to save my life . 
 you understand me ? 
 biondello . i , sir ? ne'er a whit . 
 lucentio . and not a jot of tranio in your mouth : 
 tranio is chang 'd into lucentio . 
 biondello . the better for him ; would i were so too ! 
 tranio . so could i , faith , boy , to have the next wish after , 
 that lucentio inde had baptista 's youngest daughter . 
 but , sirrah , not for my sake but your master 's , i advis 
 you use your manner discreetli in all kind of compani . 
 when i am alon , whi , then i am tranio ; 
 but in all place els your master lucentio . 
 lucentio . tranio , let 's go . 
 one thing more rest , that thyself execute- 
 to make one among these wooer . if thou ask me why- 
 sufficeth , my reason are both good and weighti . exeunt 
 
 the present abov speak 
 
 first servant . my lord , you nod ; you do not mind the play . 
 sli . ye , by saint ann do i. a good matter , sure ; come there 
 ani more of it ? 
 page . my lord , 't is but begun . 
 sli . 't is a veri excel piec of work , madam ladi 
 would 'twere done ! [ they sit and mark ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 padua . befor hortensio 's hous 
 
 enter petruchio and hi man grumio 
 
 petruchio . verona , for a while i take my leav , 
 to see my friend in padua ; but of all 
 my best belov and approv friend , 
 hortensio ; and i trow thi is hi hous . 
 here , sirrah grumio , knock , i say . 
 grumio . knock , sir ! whom should i knock ? 
 is there ani man ha rebu 'd your worship ? 
 petruchio . villain , i say , knock me here soundli . 
 grumio . knock you here , sir ? whi , sir , what am i , sir , that i 
 should knock you here , sir ? 
 petruchio . villain , i say , knock me at thi gate , 
 and rap me well , or i 'll knock your knave 's pate . 
 grumio . my master is grown quarrelsom . i should knock you first , 
 and then i know after who come by the worst . 
 petruchio . will it not be ? 
 faith , sirrah , an you 'll not knock i 'll ring it ; 
 i 'll tri how you can sol-fa , and sing it . 
 [ he wring him by the ear ] 
 grumio . help , master , help ! my master is mad . 
 petruchio . now knock when i bid you , sirrah villain ! 
 
 enter hortensio 
 
 hortensio . how now ! what 's the matter ? my old friend grumio and my 
 good friend petruchio ! how do you all at verona ? 
 petruchio . signior hortensio , come you to part the fray ? 
 'con tutto il cuor ben trovato ' may i say . 
 hortensio . alla nostra casa ben venuto , 
 molto honorato signor mio petruchio . 
 rise , grumio , rise ; we will compound thi quarrel . 
 grumio . nay , 't is no matter , sir , what he 'lege in latin . if thi 
 be not a law caus for me to leav hi service- look you , sir : 
 he bid me knock him and rap him soundli , sir . well , wa it fit 
 for a servant to use hi master so ; be , perhap , for aught i 
 see , two and thirti , a pip out ? 
 whom would to god i had well knock 'd at first , 
 then had not grumio come by the worst . 
 petruchio . a senseless villain ! good hortensio , 
 i bade the rascal knock upon your gate , 
 and could not get him for my heart to do it . 
 grumio . knock at the gate ? o heaven ! spake you not these word 
 plain : 'sirrah knock me here , rap me here , knock me well , and 
 knock me soundli ' ? and come you now with 'knock at the gate ' ? 
 petruchio . sirrah , be gone , or talk not , i advis you . 
 hortensio . petruchio , patienc ; i am grumio 's pledg ; 
 whi , thi 's a heavi chanc 'twixt him and you , 
 your ancient , trusti , pleasant servant grumio . 
 and tell me now , sweet friend , what happi gale 
 blow you to padua here from old verona ? 
 petruchio . such wind as scatter young men through the world 
 to seek their fortun farther than at home , 
 where small experi grow . but in a few , 
 signior hortensio , thu it stand with me : 
 antonio , my father , is decea 'd , 
 and i have thrust myself into thi maze , 
 hapli to wive and thrive as best i may ; 
 crown in my purs i have , and good at home , 
 and so am come abroad to see the world . 
 hortensio . petruchio , shall i then come roundli to thee 
 and wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour 'd wife ? 
 thou'dst thank me but a littl for my counsel , 
 and yet i 'll promis thee she shall be rich , 
 and veri rich ; but th'art too much my friend , 
 and i 'll not wish thee to her . 
 petruchio . signior hortensio , 'twixt such friend as we 
 few word suffic ; and therefor , if thou know 
 one rich enough to be petruchio 's wife , 
 as wealth is burden of my woo danc , 
 be she as foul as wa florentiu ' love , 
 as old as sibyl , and as curst and shrewd 
 as socrat ' xanthipp or a worse- 
 she move me not , or not remov , at least , 
 affect 's edg in me , were she as rough 
 as are the swell adriat sea . 
 i come to wive it wealthili in padua ; 
 if wealthili , then happili in padua . 
 grumio . nay , look you , sir , he tell you flatli what hi mind is . 
 whi , give him gold enough and marri him to a puppet or an 
 aglet-babi , or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head , though 
 she ha as mani diseas as two and fifti hors . whi , noth 
 come amiss , so money come withal . 
 hortensio . petruchio , sinc we are stepp 'd thu far in , 
 i will continu that i broach 'd in jest . 
 i can , petruchio , help thee to a wife 
 with wealth enough , and young and beauteou ; 
 brought up as best becom a gentlewoman ; 
 her onli fault , and that is fault enough , 
 is- that she is intoler curst , 
 and shrewd and froward so beyond all measur 
 that , were my state far worser than it is , 
 i would not wed her for a mine of gold . 
 petruchio . hortensio , peac ! thou know'st not gold 's effect . 
 tell me her father 's name , and 't is enough ; 
 for i will board her though she chide as loud 
 as thunder when the cloud in autumn crack . 
 hortensio . her father is baptista minola , 
 an affabl and courteou gentleman ; 
 her name is katherina minola , 
 renown 'd in padua for her scold tongu . 
 petruchio . i know her father , though i know not her ; 
 and he knew my deceas father well . 
 i will not sleep , hortensio , till i see her ; 
 and therefor let me be thu bold with you 
 to give you over at thi first encount , 
 unless you will accompani me thither . 
 grumio . i pray you , sir , let him go while the humour last . o ' my 
 word , and she knew him as well as i do , she would think scold 
 would do littl good upon him . she may perhap call him half a 
 score knave or so . whi , that 's noth ; and he begin onc , he 'll 
 rail in hi rope-trick . i 'll tell you what , sir : an she stand 
 him but a littl , he will throw a figur in her face , and so 
 disfigur her with it that she shall have no more eye to see 
 withal than a cat . you know him not , sir . 
 hortensio . tarri , petruchio , i must go with thee , 
 for in baptista 's keep my treasur is . 
 he hath the jewel of my life in hold , 
 hi youngest daughter , beauti bianca ; 
 and her withhold from me , and other more , 
 suitor to her and rival in my love ; 
 suppos it a thing impossible- 
 for those defect i have befor rehears'd- 
 that ever katherina will be woo 'd . 
 therefor thi order hath baptista ta'en , 
 that none shall have access unto bianca 
 till katherin the curst have got a husband . 
 grumio . katherin the curst ! 
 a titl for a maid of all titl the worst . 
 hortensio . now shall my friend petruchio do me grace , 
 and offer me disgui 'd in sober robe 
 to old baptista as a schoolmast 
 well seen in music , to instruct bianca ; 
 that so i may by thi devic at least 
 have leav and leisur to make love to her , 
 and unsuspect court her by herself . 
 
 enter gremio with lucentio disguis as cambio 
 
 grumio . here 's no knaveri ! see , to beguil the old folk , how the 
 young folk lay their head togeth ! master , master , look about 
 you . who goe there , ha ? 
 hortensio . peac , grumio ! it is the rival of my love . petruchio , 
 stand by awhil . 
 grumio . a proper stripl , and an amor ! 
 [ they stand asid ] 
 gremio . o , veri well ; i have peru 'd the note . 
 hark you , sir ; i 'll have them veri fairli bound- 
 all book of love , see that at ani hand ; 
 and see you read no other lectur to her . 
 you understand me- over and besid 
 signior baptista 's liber , 
 i 'll mend it with a largess . take your paper too , 
 and let me have them veri well perfum 'd ; 
 for she is sweeter than perfum itself 
 to whom they go to . what will you read to her ? 
 lucentio . whate' i read to her , i 'll plead for you 
 as for my patron , stand you so assur 'd , 
 as firmli as yourself were still in place ; 
 yea , and perhap with more success word 
 than you , unless you were a scholar , sir . 
 gremio . o thi learn , what a thing it is ! 
 grumio . o thi woodcock , what an ass it is ! 
 petruchio . peac , sirrah ! 
 hortensio . grumio , mum ! [ come forward ] 
 god save you , signior gremio ! 
 gremio . and you are well met , signior hortensio . 
 trow you whither i am go ? to baptista minola . 
 i promi 'd to enquir care 
 about a schoolmast for the fair bianca ; 
 and by good fortun i have light well 
 on thi young man ; for learn and behaviour 
 fit for her turn , well read in poetri 
 and other books- good one , i warrant ye . 
 hortensio . 't is well ; and i have met a gentleman 
 hath promi 'd me to help me to anoth , 
 a fine musician to instruct our mistress ; 
 so shall i no whit be behind in duti 
 to fair bianca , so belov of me . 
 gremio . belov of me- and that my deed shall prove . 
 grumio . and that hi bag shall prove . 
 hortensio . gremio , 't is now no time to vent our love . 
 listen to me , and if you speak me fair 
 i 'll tell you news indiffer good for either . 
 here is a gentleman whom by chanc i met , 
 upon agreement from us to hi like , 
 will undertak to woo curst katherin ; 
 yea , and to marri her , if her dowri pleas . 
 gremio . so said , so done , is well . 
 hortensio , have you told him all her fault ? 
 petruchio . i know she is an irksom brawl scold ; 
 if that be all , master , i hear no harm . 
 gremio . no , say'st me so , friend ? what countryman ? 
 petruchio . born in verona , old antonio 's son . 
 my father dead , my fortun live for me ; 
 and i do hope good day and long to see . 
 gremio . o sir , such a life with such a wife were strang ! 
 but if you have a stomach , to't a god 's name ; 
 you shall have me assist you in all . 
 but will you woo thi wild-cat ? 
 petruchio . will i live ? 
 grumio . will he woo her ? ay , or i 'll hang her . 
 petruchio . whi came i hither but to that intent ? 
 think you a littl din can daunt mine ear ? 
 have i not in my time heard lion roar ? 
 have i not heard the sea , puff 'd up with wind , 
 rage like an angri boar chafe with sweat ? 
 have i not heard great ordnanc in the field , 
 and heaven 's artilleri thunder in the sky ? 
 have i not in a pitch battl heard 
 loud 'larum , neigh steed , and trumpet ' clang ? 
 and do you tell me of a woman 's tongu , 
 that give not half so great a blow to hear 
 as will a chestnut in a farin 's fire ? 
 tush ! tush ! fear boy with bug . 
 grumio . for he fear none . 
 gremio . hortensio , hark : 
 thi gentleman is happili arriv 'd , 
 my mind presum , for hi own good and our . 
 hortensio . i promi 'd we would be contributor 
 and bear hi charg of woo , whatsoe' . 
 gremio . and so we will- provid that he win her . 
 grumio . i would i were as sure of a good dinner . 
 
 enter tranio , brave apparel as lucentio , and biondello 
 
 tranio . gentlemen , god save you ! if i may be bold , 
 tell me , i beseech you , which is the readiest way 
 to the hous of signior baptista minola ? 
 biondello . he that ha the two fair daughter ; is't he you mean ? 
 tranio . even he , biondello . 
 gremio . hark you , sir , you mean not her to- 
 tranio . perhap him and her , sir ; what have you to do ? 
 petruchio . not her that chide , sir , at ani hand , i pray . 
 tranio . i love no chider , sir . biondello , let 's away . 
 lucentio . [ asid ] well begun , tranio . 
 hortensio . sir , a word ere you go . 
 are you a suitor to the maid you talk of , yea or no ? 
 tranio . and if i be , sir , is it ani offenc ? 
 gremio . no ; if without more word you will get you henc . 
 tranio . whi , sir , i pray , are not the street as free 
 for me as for you ? 
 gremio . but so is not she . 
 
 tranio . for what reason , i beseech you ? 
 gremio . for thi reason , if you 'll know , 
 that she 's the choic love of signior gremio . 
 hortensio . that she 's the chosen of signior hortensio . 
 tranio . softli , my master ! if you be gentlemen , 
 do me thi right- hear me with patienc . 
 baptista is a nobl gentleman , 
 to whom my father is not all unknown , 
 and , were hi daughter fairer than she is , 
 she may more suitor have , and me for one . 
 fair leda 's daughter had a thousand wooer ; 
 then well one more may fair bianca have ; 
 and so she shall : lucentio shall make one , 
 though pari came in hope to speed alon . 
 gremio . what , thi gentleman will out-talk us all ! 
 lucentio . sir , give him head ; i know he 'll prove a jade . 
 petruchio . hortensio , to what end are all these word ? 
 hortensio . sir , let me be so bold as ask you , 
 did you yet ever see baptista 's daughter ? 
 tranio . no , sir , but hear i do that he hath two : 
 the one as famou for a scold tongu 
 as is the other for beauteou modesti . 
 petruchio . sir , sir , the first 's for me ; let her go by . 
 gremio . yea , leav that labour to great hercul , 
 and let it be more than alcid ' twelv . 
 petruchio . sir , understand you thi of me , in sooth : 
 the youngest daughter , whom you hearken for , 
 her father keep from all access of suitor , 
 and will not promis her to ani man 
 until the elder sister first be wed. 
 the younger then is free , and not befor . 
 tranio . if it be so , sir , that you are the man 
 must stead us all , and me amongst the rest ; 
 and if you break the ice , and do thi feat , 
 achiev the elder , set the younger free 
 for our access- whose hap shall be to have her 
 will not so graceless be to be ingrat . 
 hortensio . sir , you say well , and well you do conceiv ; 
 and sinc you do profess to be a suitor , 
 you must , as we do , gratifi thi gentleman , 
 to whom we all rest gener behold . 
 tranio . sir , i shall not be slack ; in sign whereof , 
 pleas ye we may contriv thi afternoon , 
 and quaff carous to our mistress ' health ; 
 and do as adversari do in law- 
 strive mightili , but eat and drink as friend . 
 grumio , biondello . o excel motion ! fellow , let 's be gone . 
 hortensio . the motion 's good inde , and be it so . 
 petruchio , i shall be your ben venuto . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act il . scene i . 
 padua . baptista 's hous 
 
 enter katherina and bianca 
 
 bianca . good sister , wrong me not , nor wrong yourself , 
 to make a bondmaid and a slave of me- 
 that i disdain ; but for these other gawd , 
 unbind my hand , i 'll pull them off myself , 
 yea , all my raiment , to my petticoat ; 
 or what you will command me will i do , 
 so well i know my duti to my elder . 
 katherina . of all thi suitor here i charg thee tell 
 whom thou lov'st best . see thou dissembl not . 
 bianca . believ me , sister , of all the men aliv 
 i never yet beheld that special face 
 which i could fanci more than ani other . 
 katherina . minion , thou liest . is't not hortensio ? 
 bianca . if you affect him , sister , here i swear 
 i 'll plead for you myself but you shall have him . 
 katherina . o then , belik , you fanci rich more : 
 you will have gremio to keep you fair . 
 bianca . is it for him you do envi me so ? 
 nay , then you jest ; and now i well perceiv 
 you have but jest with me all thi while . 
 i prithe , sister kate , unti my hand . 
 katherina . [ strike her ] if that be jest , then an the rest wa so . 
 
 enter baptista 
 
 baptista . whi , how now , dame ! whenc grow thi insol ? 
 bianca , stand aside- poor girl ! she weep . 
 [ he unbind her ] 
 go pli thi needl ; meddl not with her . 
 for shame , thou hild of a devilish spirit , 
 whi dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee ? 
 when did she cross thee with a bitter word ? 
 katherina . her silenc flout me , and i 'll be reveng 'd . 
 [ fli after bianca ] 
 baptista . what , in my sight ? bianca , get thee in . 
 exit bianca 
 katherina . what , will you not suffer me ? nay , now i see 
 she is your treasur , she must have a husband ; 
 i must danc bare-foot on her wedding-day , 
 and for your love to her lead ape in hell . 
 talk not to me ; i will go sit and weep , 
 till i can find occas of reveng . exit katherina 
 baptista . wa ever gentleman thu griev 'd as i ? 
 but who come here ? 
 
 enter gremio , with lucentio in the habit of a mean man ; 
 petruchio , with hortensio as a musician ; and tranio , 
 as lucentio , with hi boy , biondello , bear a lute and book 
 
 gremio . good morrow , neighbour baptista . 
 baptista . good morrow , neighbour gremio . 
 god save you , gentlemen ! 
 petruchio . and you , good sir ! pray , have you not a daughter 
 call 'd katherina , fair and virtuou ? 
 baptista . i have a daughter , sir , call 'd katherina . 
 gremio . you are too blunt ; go to it orderli . 
 petruchio . you wrong me , signior gremio ; give me leav . 
 i am a gentleman of verona , sir , 
 that , hear of her beauti and her wit , 
 her affabl and bash modesti , 
 her wondrou qualiti and mild behaviour , 
 am bold to show myself a forward guest 
 within your hous , to make mine eye the wit 
 of that report which i so oft have heard . 
 and , for an entranc to my entertain , 
 i do present you with a man of mine , 
 [ present hortensio ] 
 cun in music and the mathemat , 
 to instruct her fulli in those scienc , 
 whereof i know she is not ignor . 
 accept of him , or els you do me wrong- 
 hi name is licio , born in mantua . 
 baptista . y'are welcom , sir , and he for your good sake ; 
 but for my daughter katherin , thi i know , 
 she is not for your turn , the more my grief . 
 petruchio . i see you do not mean to part with her ; 
 or els you like not of my compani . 
 baptista . mistak me not ; i speak but as i find . 
 whenc are you , sir ? what may i call your name ? 
 petruchio . petruchio is my name , antonio 's son , 
 a man well known throughout all itali . 
 baptista . i know him well ; you are welcom for hi sake . 
 gremio . save your tale , petruchio , i pray , 
 let us that are poor petition speak too . 
 bacar ! you are marvel forward . 
 petruchio . o , pardon me , signior gremio ! i would fain be do . 
 gremio . i doubt it not , sir ; but you will curs your woo . 
 neighbour , thi is a gift veri grate , i am sure of it . to 
 express the like kind , myself , that have been more kindli 
 behold to you than ani , freeli give unto you thi young 
 scholar [ present lucentio ] that hath been long studi at 
 rheim ; as cun in greek , latin , and other languag , as the 
 other in music and mathemat . hi name is cambio . pray accept 
 hi servic . 
 baptista . a thousand thank , signior gremio . welcom , good cambio . 
 [ to tranio ] but , gentl sir , methink you walk like a stranger . 
 may i be so bold to know the caus of your come ? 
 tranio . pardon me , sir , the bold is mine own 
 that , be a stranger in thi citi here , 
 do make myself a suitor to your daughter , 
 unto bianca , fair and virtuou . 
 nor is your firm resolv unknown to me 
 in the prefer of the eldest sister . 
 thi liberti is all that i request- 
 that , upon knowledg of my parentag , 
 i may have welcom 'mongst the rest that woo , 
 and free access and favour as the rest . 
 and toward the educ of your daughter 
 i here bestow a simpl instrument , 
 and thi small packet of greek and latin book . 
 if you accept them , then their worth is great . 
 baptista . lucentio is your name ? of whenc , i pray ? 
 tranio . of pisa , sir ; son to vincentio . 
 baptista . a mighti man of pisa . by report 
 i know him well . you are veri welcom , sir . 
 take you the lute , and you the set of book ; 
 you shall go see your pupil present . 
 holla , within ! 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 sirrah , lead these gentlemen 
 to my daughter ; and tell them both 
 these are their tutor . bid them use them well . 
 
 exit servant lead hortensio carri the lute 
 and lucentio with the book 
 
 we will go walk a littl in the orchard , 
 and then to dinner . you are pass welcom , 
 and so i pray you all to think yourselv . 
 petruchio . signior baptista , my busi asketh hast , 
 and everi day i can not come to woo . 
 you knew my father well , and in him me , 
 left sole heir to all hi land and good , 
 which i have better rather than decrea 'd . 
 then tell me , if i get your daughter 's love , 
 what dowri shall i have with her to wife ? 
 baptista . after my death , the one half of my land 
 and , in possess , twenti thousand crown . 
 petruchio . and for that dowri , i 'll assur her of 
 her widowhood , be it that she surviv me , 
 in all my land and leas whatsoev . 
 let special be therefor drawn between us , 
 that coven may be kept on either hand . 
 baptista . ay , when the special thing is well obtain 'd , 
 that is , her love ; for that is all in all . 
 petruchio . whi , that is noth ; for i tell you , father , 
 i am as peremptori as she proud-mind ; 
 and where two rage fire meet togeth , 
 they do consum the thing that feed their furi . 
 though littl fire grow great with littl wind , 
 yet extrem gust will blow out fire and all . 
 so i to her , and so she yield to me ; 
 for i am rough , and woo not like a babe . 
 baptista . well mayst thou woo , and happi be thi speed 
 but be thou arm 'd for some unhappi word . 
 petruchio . ay , to the proof , as mountain are for wind , 
 that shake not though they blow perpetu . 
 
 re-ent hortensio , with hi head broke 
 
 baptista . how now , my friend ! whi dost thou look so pale ? 
 hortensio . for fear , i promis you , if i look pale . 
 baptista . what , will my daughter prove a good musician ? 
 hortensio . i think she 'll sooner prove a soldier : 
 iron may hold with her , but never lute . 
 baptista . whi , then thou canst not break her to the lute ? 
 hortensio . whi , no ; for she hath broke the lute to me . 
 i did but tell her she mistook her fret , 
 and bow 'd her hand to teach her finger , 
 when , with a most impati devilish spirit , 
 'fret , call you these ? ' quoth she ' i 'll fume with them . ' 
 and with that word she struck me on the head , 
 and through the instrument my pate made way ; 
 and there i stood amaz for a while , 
 as on a pillori , look through the lute , 
 while she did call me rascal fiddler 
 and twangl jack , with twenti such vile term , 
 as she had studi to misus me so . 
 petruchio . now , by the world , it is a lusti wench ; 
 i love her ten time more than e'er i did . 
 o , how i long to have some chat with her ! 
 baptista . well , go with me , and be not so discomfit ; 
 proceed in practic with my younger daughter ; 
 she 's apt to learn , and thank for good turn . 
 signior petruchio , will you go with us , 
 or shall i send my daughter kate to you ? 
 petruchio . i pray you do . exeunt all but petruchio 
 i 'll attend her here , 
 and woo her with some spirit when she come . 
 say that she rail ; whi , then i 'll tell her plain 
 she sing as sweetli as a nightingal . 
 say that she frown ; i 'll say she look as clear 
 as morn rose newli wash 'd with dew . 
 say she be mute , and will not speak a word ; 
 then i 'll commend her volubl , 
 and say she uttereth pierc eloqu . 
 if she do bid me pack , i 'll give her thank , 
 as though she bid me stay by her a week ; 
 if she deni to wed , i 'll crave the day 
 when i shall ask the bann , and when be marri . 
 but here she come ; : lnd.now , petruchio , speak . 
 
 enter katherina 
 
 good morrow , kate- for that 's your name , i hear . 
 katherina . well have you heard , but someth hard of hear : 
 they call me katherin that do talk of me . 
 petruchio . you lie , in faith , for you are call 'd plain kate , 
 and bonni kate , and sometim kate the curst ; 
 but , kate , the prettiest kate in christendom , 
 kate of kate hall , my super-dainti kate , 
 for dainti are all kate , and therefor , kate , 
 take thi of me , kate of my consolation- 
 hear thi mild prai 'd in everi town , 
 thi virtu spoke of , and thi beauti sound , 
 yet not so deepli as to thee belong , 
 myself am mov 'd to woo thee for my wife . 
 katherina . mov 'd ! in good time ! let him that mov 'd you hither 
 remov you henc . i knew you at the first 
 you were a moveabl . 
 petruchio . whi , what 's a moveabl ? 
 katherina . a join'd-stool . 
 petruchio . thou hast hit it . come , sit on me . 
 katherina . ass are made to bear , and so are you . 
 petruchio . women are made to bear , and so are you . 
 katherina . no such jade as you , if me you mean . 
 petruchio . ala , good kate , i will not burden thee ! 
 for , know thee to be but young and light- 
 katherina . too light for such a swain as you to catch ; 
 and yet as heavi as my weight should be . 
 petruchio . should be ! should- buzz ! 
 katherina . well ta'en , and like a buzzard . 
 petruchio . o , slow-w 'd turtl , shall a buzzard take thee ? 
 katherina . ay , for a turtl , as he take a buzzard . 
 petruchio . come , come , you wasp ; i ' faith , you are too angri . 
 katherina . if i be waspish , best bewar my sting . 
 petruchio . my remedi is then to pluck it out . 
 katherina . ay , if the fool could find it where it lie . 
 petruchio . who know not where a wasp doe wear hi sting ? 
 in hi tail . 
 katherina . in hi tongu . 
 petruchio . whose tongu ? 
 katherina . your , if you talk of tale ; and so farewel . 
 petruchio . what , with my tongu in your tail ? nay , come again , 
 good kate ; i am a gentleman . 
 katherina . that i 'll tri . [ she strike him ] 
 petruchio . i swear i 'll cuff you , if you strike again . 
 katherina . so may you lose your arm . 
 if you strike me , you are no gentleman ; 
 and if no gentleman , whi then no arm . 
 petruchio . a herald , kate ? o , put me in thi book ! 
 katherina . what is your crest- a coxcomb ? 
 petruchio . a combless cock , so kate will be my hen . 
 katherina . no cock of mine : you crow too like a craven . 
 petruchio . nay , come , kate , come ; you must not look so sour . 
 katherina . it is my fashion , when i see a crab . 
 petruchio . whi , here 's no crab ; and therefor look not sour . 
 katherina . there is , there is . 
 petruchio . then show it me . 
 katherina . had i a glass i would . 
 petruchio . what , you mean my face ? 
 katherina . well aim 'd of such a young one . 
 petruchio . now , by saint georg , i am too young for you . 
 katherina . yet you are wither 'd . 
 petruchio . 't is with care . 
 katherina . i care not . 
 petruchio . nay , hear you , kate- in sooth , you scape not so . 
 katherina . i chafe you , if i tarri ; let me go . 
 petruchio . no , not a whit ; i find you pass gentl . 
 't wa told me you were rough , and coy , and sullen , 
 and now i find report a veri liar ; 
 for thou art pleasant , gamesom , pass courteou , 
 but slow in speech , yet sweet as springtim flower . 
 thou canst not frown , thou canst not look askanc , 
 nor bite the lip , as angri wench will , 
 nor hast thou pleasur to be cross in talk ; 
 but thou with mild entertain'st thi wooer ; 
 with gentl confer , soft and affabl . 
 whi doe the world report that kate doth limp ? 
 o sland'rou world ! kate like the hazel-twig 
 is straight and slender , and as brown in hue 
 as hazel-nut , and sweeter than the kernel . 
 o , let me see thee walk . thou dost not halt . 
 katherina . go , fool , and whom thou keep'st command . 
 petruchio . did ever dian so becom a grove 
 as kate thi chamber with her princ gait ? 
 o , be thou dian , and let her be kate ; 
 and then let kate be chast , and dian sport ! 
 katherina . where did you studi all thi goodli speech ? 
 petruchio . it is extempor , from my mother wit . 
 katherina . a witti mother ! witless els her son . 
 petruchio . am i not wise ? 
 katherina . ye , keep you warm . 
 petruchio . marri , so i mean , sweet katherin , in thi bed . 
 and therefor , set all thi chat asid , 
 thu in plain term : your father hath consent 
 that you shall be my wife your dowri greed on ; 
 and will you , nill you , i will marri you . 
 now , kate , i am a husband for your turn ; 
 for , by thi light , wherebi i see thi beauti , 
 thi beauti that doth make me like thee well , 
 thou must be marri to no man but me ; 
 for i am he am born to tame you , kate , 
 and bring you from a wild kate to a kate 
 conform as other household kate . 
 
 re-ent baptista , gremio , and tranio 
 
 here come your father . never make denial ; 
 i must and will have katherin to my wife . 
 baptista . now , signior petruchio , how speed you with my daughter ? 
 petruchio . how but well , sir ? how but well ? 
 it were imposs i should speed amiss . 
 baptista . whi , how now , daughter katherin , in your dump ? 
 katherina . call you me daughter ? now i promis you 
 you have show 'd a tender fatherli regard 
 to wish me wed to one half lunat , 
 a mad-cap ruffian and a swear jack , 
 that think with oath to face the matter out . 
 petruchio . father , 't is thu : yourself and all the world 
 that talk 'd of her have talk 'd amiss of her . 
 if she be curst , it is for polici , 
 for , she 's not froward , but modest as the dove ; 
 she is not hot , but temper as the morn ; 
 for patienc she will prove a second grissel , 
 and roman lucrec for her chastiti . 
 and , to conclud , we have 'greed so well togeth 
 that upon sunday is the wedding-day . 
 katherina . i 'll see thee hang 'd on sunday first . 
 gremio . hark , petruchio ; she say she 'll see thee hang 'd first . 
 tranio . is thi your speed ? nay , then good-night our part ! 
 petruchio . be patient , gentlemen . i choos her for myself ; 
 if she and i be plea 'd , what 's that to you ? 
 't is bargain 'd 'twixt us twain , be alon , 
 that she shall still be curst in compani . 
 i tell you 't is incred to believ . 
 how much she love me- o , the kindest kate ! 
 she hung about my neck , and kiss on kiss 
 she vie so fast , protest oath on oath , 
 that in a twink she won me to her love . 
 o , you are novic ! 't is a world to see , 
 how tame , when men and women are alon , 
 a meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew . 
 give me thi hand , kate ; i will unto venic , 
 to buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day . 
 provid the feast , father , and bid the guest ; 
 i will be sure my katherin shall be fine . 
 baptista . i know not what to say ; but give me your hand . 
 god send you joy , petruchio ! 't is a match . 
 gremio , tranio . amen , say we ; we will be wit . 
 petruchio . father , and wife , and gentlemen , adieu . 
 i will to venic ; sunday come apac ; 
 we will have ring and thing , and fine array ; 
 and kiss me , kate ; we will be marri a sunday . 
 exeunt petruchio and katherina sever 
 gremio . wa ever match clapp 'd up so suddenli ? 
 baptista . faith , gentlemen , now i play a merchant 's part , 
 and ventur madli on a desper mart . 
 tranio . 't wa a commod lay fret by you ; 
 'twill bring you gain , or perish on the sea . 
 baptista . the gain i seek is quiet in the match . 
 gremio . no doubt but he hath got a quiet catch . 
 but now , baptista , to your younger daughter : 
 now is the day we long have look for ; 
 i am your neighbour , and wa suitor first . 
 tranio . and i am one that love bianca more 
 than word can wit or your thought can guess . 
 gremio . youngl , thou canst not love so dear as i . 
 tranio . greybeard , thi love doth freez . 
 gremio . but thine doth fri . 
 skipper , stand back ; 't is age that nourisheth . 
 tranio . but youth in ladi ' eye that flourisheth . 
 baptista . content you , gentlemen ; i will compound thi strife . 
 't is deed must win the prize , and he of both 
 that can assur my daughter greatest dower 
 shall have my bianca 's love . 
 say , signior gremio , what can you assur her ? 
 gremio . first , as you know , my hous within the citi 
 is richli furnish with plate and gold , 
 basin and ewer to lave her dainti hand ; 
 my hang all of tyrian tapestri ; 
 in ivori coffer i have stuff 'd my crown ; 
 in cypress chest my arra counterpoint , 
 costli apparel , tent , and canopi , 
 fine linen , turkey cushion boss 'd with pearl , 
 valanc of venic gold in needle-work ; 
 pewter and brass , and all thing that belong 
 to hous or housekeep . then at my farm 
 i have a hundr milch-kin to the pail , 
 six score fat oxen stand in my stall , 
 and all thing answer to thi portion . 
 myself am struck in year , i must confess ; 
 and if i die to-morrow thi is her , 
 if whilst i live she will be onli mine . 
 tranio . that 'onli ' came well in . sir , list to me : 
 i am my father 's heir and onli son ; 
 if i may have your daughter to my wife , 
 i 'll leav her hous three or four as good 
 within rich pisa 's wall as ani one 
 old signior gremio ha in padua ; 
 besid two thousand ducat by the year 
 of fruit land , all which shall be her jointur . 
 what , have i pinch 'd you , signior gremio ? 
 gremio . two thousand ducat by the year of land ! 
 [ asid ] my land amount not to so much in all.- 
 that she shall have , besid an argosi 
 that now is lie in marseil road . 
 what , have i chok 'd you with an argosi ? 
 tranio . gremio , 't is known my father hath no less 
 than three great argosi , besid two galliass , 
 and twelv tight galley . these i will assur her , 
 and twice as much whate' thou off'rest next . 
 gremio . nay , i have off'r all ; i have no more ; 
 and she can have no more than all i have ; 
 if you like me , she shall have me and mine . 
 tranio . whi , then the maid is mine from all the world 
 by your firm promis ; gremio is out-vi . 
 baptista . i must confess your offer is the best ; 
 and let your father make her the assur , 
 she is your own . els , you must pardon me ; 
 if you should die befor him , where 's her dower ? 
 tranio . that 's but a cavil ; he is old , i young . 
 gremio . and may not young men die as well as old ? 
 baptista . well , gentlemen , 
 i am thu resolv 'd : on sunday next you know 
 my daughter katherin is to be marri ; 
 now , on the sunday follow shall bianca 
 be bride to you , if you make thi assur ; 
 if not , to signior gremio . 
 and so i take my leav , and thank you both . 
 gremio . adieu , good neighbour . exit baptista 
 now , i fear thee not . 
 sirrah young gamest , your father were a fool 
 to give thee all , and in hi wane age 
 set foot under thi tabl . tut , a toy ! 
 an old italian fox is not so kind , my boy . exit 
 tranio . a vengeanc on your crafti wither hide ! 
 yet i have fac 'd it with a card of ten . 
 't is in my head to do my master good : 
 i see no reason but suppo 'd lucentio 
 must get a father , call 'd suppo 'd vincentio ; 
 and that 's a wonder- father commonli 
 do get their children ; but in thi case of woo 
 a child shall get a sire , if i fail not of my cun . 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 padua . baptista 's hous 
 
 enter lucentio as cambio , hortensio as licio , and bianca 
 
 lucentio . fiddler , forbear ; you grow too forward , sir . 
 have you so soon forgot the entertain 
 her sister katherin welcom 'd you withal ? 
 hortensio . but , wrangl pedant , thi is 
 the patro of heavenli harmoni . 
 then give me leav to have prerog ; 
 and when in music we have spent an hour , 
 your lectur shall have leisur for as much . 
 lucentio . preposter ass , that never read so far 
 to know the caus whi music wa ordain 'd ! 
 wa it not to refresh the mind of man 
 after hi studi or hi usual pain ? 
 then give me leav to read philosophi , 
 and while i paus serv in your harmoni . 
 hortensio . sirrah , i will not bear these brave of thine . 
 bianca . whi , gentlemen , you do me doubl wrong 
 to strive for that which resteth in my choic . 
 i arn no breech scholar in the school , 
 i 'll not be tie to hour nor 'point time , 
 but learn my lesson as i pleas myself . 
 and to cut off all strife : here sit we down ; 
 take you your instrument , play you the while ! 
 hi lectur will be done ere you have tun 'd . 
 hortensio . you 'll leav hi lectur when i am in tune ? 
 lucentio . that will be never- tune your instrument . 
 bianca . where left we last ? 
 lucentio . here , madam : 
 'hic ibat simoi , hic est sigeia tellu , 
 hic steterat priami regia celsa seni . ' 
 bianca . constru them . 
 lucentio . 'hic ibat ' as i told you before- 'simoi ' i am lucentio- 
 'hic est ' son unto vincentio of pisa- 'sigeia tellu ' disguis 
 thu to get your love- 'hic steterat ' and that lucentio that 
 come a-wooing- 'priami ' is my man tranio- 'regia ' bear my 
 port- 'celsa seni ' that we might beguil the old pantaloon . 
 hortensio . madam , my instrument 's in tune . 
 bianca . let 's hear . o fie ! the trebl jar . 
 lucentio . spit in the hole , man , and tune again . 
 bianca . now let me see if i can constru it : 'hic ibat simoi ' i 
 know you not- 'hic est sigeia tellu ' i trust you not- 'hic 
 steterat priami ' take heed he hear us not- 'regia ' presum not- 
 'celsa seni ' despair not . 
 hortensio . madam , 't is now in tune . 
 lucentio . all but the bass . 
 hortensio . the bass is right ; 't is the base knave that jar . 
 [ asid ] how fieri and forward our pedant is ! 
 now , for my life , the knave doth court my love . 
 pedascul , i 'll watch you better yet . 
 bianca . in time i may believ , yet i mistrust . 
 lucentio . mistrust it not- for sure , aeacid 
 wa ajax , call 'd so from hi grandfath . 
 bianca . i must believ my master ; els , i promis you , 
 i should be argu still upon that doubt ; 
 but let it rest . now , licio , to you . 
 good master , take it not unkindli , pray , 
 that i have been thu pleasant with you both . 
 hortensio . [ to lucentio ] you may go walk and give me leav 
 awhil ; 
 my lesson make no music in three part . 
 lucentio . are you so formal , sir ? well , i must wait , 
 [ asid ] and watch withal ; for , but i be deceiv 'd , 
 our fine musician groweth amor . 
 hortensio . madam , befor you touch the instrument 
 to learn the order of my finger , 
 i must begin with rudiment of art , 
 to teach you gamut in a briefer sort , 
 more pleasant , pithi , and effectu , 
 than hath been taught by ani of my trade ; 
 and there it is in write fairli drawn . 
 bianca . whi , i am past my gamut long ago . 
 hortensio . yet read the gamut of hortensio . 
 bianca . [ read ] 
 ' '' gamut '' i am , the ground of all accord- 
 `` a re '' to plead hortensio 's passion- 
 `` b mi '' bianca , take him for thi lord- 
 `` c fa ut '' that love with all affection- 
 `` d sol re '' one clef , two note have i- 
 `` e la mi '' show piti or i die . ' 
 call you thi gamut ? tut , i like it not ! 
 old fashion pleas me best ; i am not so nice 
 to chang true rule for odd invent . 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 servant . mistress , your father pray you leav your book 
 and help to dress your sister 's chamber up . 
 you know to-morrow is the wedding-day . 
 bianca . farewel , sweet master , both ; i must be gone . 
 exeunt bianca and servant 
 lucentio . faith , mistress , then i have no caus to stay . 
 exit 
 hortensio . but i have caus to pri into thi pedant ; 
 methink he look as though he were in love . 
 yet if thi thought , bianca , be so humbl 
 to cast thi wand'r eye on everi stale- 
 seiz thee that list . if onc i find thee rang , 
 hortensio will be quit with thee by chang . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 padua . befor baptista'so hous 
 
 enter baptista , gremio , tranio as lucentio , katherina , bianca , 
 lucentio as cambio , and attend 
 
 baptista . [ to tranio ] signior lucentio , thi is the 'point day 
 that katherin and petruchio should be marri , 
 and yet we hear not of our son-in-law . 
 what will be said ? what mockeri will it be 
 to want the bridegroom when the priest attend 
 to speak the ceremoni rite of marriag ! 
 what say lucentio to thi shame of our ? 
 katherina . no shame but mine ; i must , forsooth , be forc 'd 
 to give my hand , oppo 'd against my heart , 
 unto a mad-brain rudesbi , full of spleen , 
 who woo 'd in hast and mean to wed at leisur . 
 i told you , i , he wa a frantic fool , 
 hide hi bitter jest in blunt behaviour ; 
 and , to be note for a merri man , 
 he 'll woo a thousand , 'point the day of marriag , 
 make friend invit , and proclaim the bann ; 
 yet never mean to wed where he hath woo 'd . 
 now must the world point at poor katherin , 
 and say 'lo , there is mad petruchio 's wife , 
 if it would pleas him come and marri her ! ' 
 tranio . patienc , good katherin , and baptista too . 
 upon my life , petruchio mean but well , 
 whatev fortun stay him from hi word . 
 though he be blunt , i know him pass wise ; 
 though he be merri , yet withal he 's honest . 
 katherina . would katherin had never seen him though ! 
 exit , weep , follow by bianca and other 
 baptista . go , girl , i can not blame thee now to weep , 
 for such an injuri would vex a veri saint ; 
 much more a shrew of thi impati humour . 
 
 enter biondello 
 
 master , master ! news , and such old news as you never heard of ! 
 baptista . is it new and old too ? how may that be ? 
 biondello . whi , is it not news to hear of petruchio 's come ? 
 baptista . is he come ? 
 biondello . whi , no , sir . 
 baptista . what then ? 
 biondello . he is come . 
 baptista . when will he be here ? 
 biondello . when he stand where i am and see you there . 
 tranio . but , say , what to thine old news ? 
 biondello . whi , petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old 
 jerkin ; a pair of old breech thrice turn 'd ; a pair of boot 
 that have been candle-cas , one buckl , anoth lac 'd ; an old 
 rusti sword ta'en out of the town armouri , with a broken hilt , 
 and chapeless ; with two broken point ; hi hors hipp 'd , with an 
 old motley saddl and stirrup of no kindr ; besid , possess 'd 
 with the glander and like to mose in the chine , troubl with 
 the lampass , infect with the fashion , full of windgal , sped 
 with spavin , ray with the yellow , past cure of the five , 
 stark spoil 'd with the stagger , begnawn with the bot , sway 'd in 
 the back and shoulder-shotten , near-legg 'd befor , and with a 
 half-cheek 'd bit , and a head-stal of sheep 's leather which , 
 be restrain to keep him from stumbl , hath been often 
 burst , and now repair with knot ; one girth six time piec 'd , 
 and a woman 's crupper of velur , which hath two letter for her 
 name fairli set down in stud , and here and there piec 'd with 
 pack-thread . 
 baptista . who come with him ? 
 biondello . o , sir , hi lackey , for all the world caparison 'd like 
 the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hos 
 on the other , gart'r with a red and blue list ; an old hat , and 
 the humour of forti fanci prick 'd i n't for a feather ; a 
 monster , a veri monster in apparel , and not like a christian 
 footboy or a gentleman 's lackey . 
 tranio . 't is some odd humour prick him to thi fashion ; 
 yet oftentim lie goe but mean-apparel 'd . 
 baptista . i am glad he 's come , howsoe' he come . 
 biondello . whi , sir , he come not . 
 baptista . didst thou not say he come ? 
 biondello . who ? that petruchio came ? 
 baptista . ay , that petruchio came . 
 biondello . no , sir ; i say hi hors come with him on hi back . 
 baptista . whi , that 's all one . 
 biondello . nay , by saint jami , 
 i hold you a penni , 
 a hors and a man 
 is more than one , 
 and yet not mani . 
 
 enter petruchio and grumio 
 
 petruchio . come , where be these gallant ? who 's at home ? 
 baptista . you are welcom , sir . 
 petruchio . and yet i come not well . 
 baptista . and yet you halt not . 
 tranio . not so well apparel 'd 
 as i wish you were . 
 petruchio . were it better , i should rush in thu . 
 but where is kate ? where is my love bride ? 
 how doe my father ? gentl , methink you frown ; 
 and wherefor gaze thi goodli compani 
 as if they saw some wondrou monument , 
 some comet or unusu prodigi ? 
 baptista . whi , sir , you know thi is your wedding-day . 
 first were we sad , fear you would not come ; 
 now sadder , that you come so unprovid . 
 fie , doff thi habit , shame to your estat , 
 an eye-sor to our solemn festiv ! 
 tranio . and tell us what occas of import 
 hath all so long detain 'd you from your wife , 
 and sent you hither so unlik yourself ? 
 petruchio . tediou it were to tell , and harsh to hear ; 
 sufficeth i am come to keep my word , 
 though in some part enforc to digress , 
 which at more leisur i will so excus 
 as you shall well be satisfi withal . 
 but where is kate ? i stay too long from her ; 
 the morn wear , 't is time we were at church . 
 tranio . see not your bride in these unrever robe ; 
 go to my chamber , put on cloth of mine . 
 petruchio . not i , believ me ; thu i 'll visit her . 
 baptista . but thu , i trust , you will not marri her . 
 petruchio . good sooth , even thu ; therefor ha ' done with word ; 
 to me she 's marri , not unto my cloth . 
 could i repair what she will wear in me 
 as i can chang these poor accoutr , 
 'twere well for kate and better for myself . 
 but what a fool am i to chat with you , 
 when i should bid good-morrow to my bride 
 and seal the titl with a love kiss ! 
 exeunt petruchio and petruchio 
 tranio . he hath some mean in hi mad attir . 
 we will persuad him , be it possibl , 
 to put on better ere he go to church . 
 baptista . i 'll after him and see the event of thi . 
 exeunt baptista , gremio , biondello , and attend 
 tranio . but to her love concerneth us to ad 
 her father 's like ; which to bring to pass , 
 as i befor impart to your worship , 
 i am to get a man- whate' he be 
 it skill not much ; we 'll fit him to our turn- 
 and he shall be vincentio of pisa , 
 and make assur here in padua 
 of greater sum than i have promis . 
 so shall you quietli enjoy your hope 
 and marri sweet bianca with consent . 
 lucentio . were it not that my fellow schoolmast 
 doth watch bianca 's step so narrowli , 
 'twere good , methink , to steal our marriag ; 
 which onc perform 'd , let all the world say no , 
 i 'll keep mine own despit of all the world . 
 tranio . that by degre we mean to look into 
 and watch our vantag in thi busi ; 
 we 'll over-reach the greybeard , gremio , 
 the narrow-pri father , minola , 
 the quaint musician , amor licio- 
 all for my master 's sake , lucentio . 
 
 re-ent gremio 
 
 signior gremio , came you from the church ? 
 gremio . as willingli as e'er i came from school . 
 tranio . and is the bride and bridegroom come home ? 
 gremio . a bridegroom , say you ? 't is a groom inde , 
 a grumbl groom , and that the girl shall find . 
 tranio . curster than she ? whi , 't is imposs . 
 gremio . whi , he 's a devil , a devil , a veri fiend . 
 tranio . whi , she 's a devil , a devil , the devil 's dam . 
 gremio . tut , she 's a lamb , a dove , a fool , to him ! 
 i 'll tell you , sir lucentio : when the priest 
 should ask if katherin should be hi wife , 
 'ay , by gogs-woun ' quoth he , and swore so loud 
 that , all amaz 'd , the priest let fall the book ; 
 and as he stoop 'd again to take it up , 
 thi mad-brain 'd bridegroom took him such a cuff 
 that down fell priest and book , and book and priest . 
 'now take them up , ' quoth he 'if ani list . ' 
 tranio . what said the wench , when he rose again ? 
 gremio . trembl and shook , for whi he stamp 'd and swore 
 as if the vicar meant to cozen him . 
 but after mani ceremoni done 
 he call for wine : ' a health ! ' quoth he , as if 
 he had been abroad , carous to hi mate 
 after a storm ; quaff 'd off the muscadel , 
 and threw the sop all in the sexton 's face , 
 have no other reason 
 but that hi beard grew thin and hungerli 
 and seem 'd to ask him sop as he wa drink . 
 thi done , he took the bride about the neck , 
 and kiss 'd her lip with such a clamor smack 
 that at the part all the church did echo . 
 and i , see thi , came thenc for veri shame ; 
 and after me , i know , the rout is come . 
 such a mad marriag never wa befor . 
 hark , hark ! i hear the minstrel play . [ music play ] 
 
 enter petruchio , katherina , bianca , baptista , hortensio , 
 grumio , and train 
 
 petruchio . gentlemen and friend , i thank you for your pain . 
 i know you think to dine with me to-day , 
 and have prepar 'd great store of wed cheer 
 but so it is- my hast doth call me henc , 
 and therefor here i mean to take my leav . 
 baptista . is't possibl you will away to-night ? 
 petruchio . i must away to-day befor night come . 
 make it no wonder ; if you knew my busi , 
 you would entreat me rather go than stay . 
 and , honest compani , i thank you all 
 that have beheld me give away myself 
 to thi most patient , sweet , and virtuou wife . 
 dine with my father , drink a health to me . 
 for i must henc ; and farewel to you all . 
 tranio . let us entreat you stay till after dinner . 
 petruchio . it may not be . 
 gremio . let me entreat you . 
 petruchio . it can not be . 
 katherina . let me entreat you . 
 petruchio . i am content . 
 katherina . are you content to stay ? 
 petruchio . i am content you shall entreat me stay ; 
 but yet not stay , entreat me how you can . 
 katherina . now , if you love me , stay . 
 petruchio . grumio , my hors . 
 grumio . ay , sir , they be readi ; the oat have eaten the hors . 
 katherina . nay , then , 
 do what thou canst , i will not go to-day ; 
 no , nor to-morrow , not till i pleas myself . 
 the door is open , sir ; there lie your way ; 
 you may be jog while your boot are green ; 
 for me , i 'll not be gone till i pleas myself . 
 't is like you 'll prove a jolli surli groom 
 that take it on you at the first so roundli . 
 petruchio . o kate , content thee ; prithe be not angri . 
 katherina . i will be angri ; what hast thou to do ? 
 father , be quiet ; he shall stay my leisur . 
 gremio . ay , marri , sir , now it begin to work . 
 katherina . gentlemen , forward to the bridal dinner . 
 i see a woman may be made a fool 
 if she had not a spirit to resist . 
 petruchio . they shall go forward , kate , at thi command . 
 obey the bride , you that attend on her ; 
 go to the feast , revel and domin , 
 carous full measur to her maidenhead ; 
 be mad and merri , or go hang yourselv . 
 but for my bonni kate , she must with me . 
 nay , look not big , nor stamp , nor stare , nor fret ; 
 i will be master of what is mine own- 
 she is my good , my chattel , she is my hous , 
 my household stuff , my field , my barn , 
 my hors , my ox , my ass , my ani thing , 
 and here she stand ; touch her whoever dare ; 
 i 'll bring mine action on the proudest he 
 that stop my way in padua . grumio , 
 draw forth thi weapon ; we are beset with thiev ; 
 rescu thi mistress , if thou be a man . 
 fear not , sweet wench ; they shall not touch thee , kate ; 
 i 'll buckler thee against a million . 
 exeunt petruchio , katherina , and grumio 
 baptista . nay , let them go , a coupl of quiet one . 
 gremio . went they not quickli , i should die with laugh . 
 tranio . of all mad match , never wa the like . 
 lucentio . mistress , what 's your opinion of your sister ? 
 bianca . that , be mad herself , she 's madli mate . 
 gremio . i warrant him , petruchio is kate . 
 baptista . neighbour and friend , though bride and bridegroom want 
 for to suppli the place at the tabl , 
 you know there want no junket at the feast . 
 lucentio , you shall suppli the bridegroom 's place ; 
 and let bianca take her sister 's room . 
 tranio . shall sweet bianca practis how to bride it ? 
 baptista . she shall , lucentio . come , gentlemen , let 's go . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 petruchio 's countri hous 
 
 enter grumio 
 
 grumio . fie , fie on all tire jade , on all mad master , and all 
 foul way ! wa ever man so beaten ? wa ever man so ray 'd ? wa 
 ever man so weari ? i am sent befor to make a fire , and they are 
 come after to warm them . now were not i a littl pot and soon 
 hot , my veri lip might freez to my teeth , my tongu to the roof 
 of my mouth , my heart in my belli , ere i should come by a fire to 
 thaw me . but i with blow the fire shall warm myself ; for , 
 consid the weather , a taller man than i will take cold . 
 holla , ho ! curti ! 
 
 enter curti 
 
 curti . who is that call so coldli ? 
 grumio . a piec of ice . if thou doubt it , thou mayst slide from my 
 shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my 
 neck . a fire , good curti . 
 curti . is my master and hi wife come , grumio ? 
 grumio . o , ay , curti , ay ; and therefor fire , fire ; cast on no 
 water . 
 curti . is she so hot a shrew as she 's report ? 
 grumio . she wa , good curti , befor thi frost ; but thou know'st 
 winter tame man , woman , and beast ; for it hath tam 'd my old 
 master , and my new mistress , and myself , fellow curti . 
 curti . away , you three-inch fool ! i am no beast . 
 grumio . am i but three inch ? whi , thi horn is a foot , and so long 
 am i at the least . but wilt thou make a fire , or shall i complain 
 on thee to our mistress , whose hand- she be now at hand- thou 
 shalt soon feel , to thi cold comfort , for be slow in thi hot 
 offic ? 
 curti . i prithe , good grumio , tell me how goe the world ? 
 grumio . a cold world , curti , in everi offic but thine ; and 
 therefor fire . do thi duti , and have thi duti , for my master and 
 mistress are almost frozen to death . 
 curti . there 's fire readi ; and therefor , good grumio , the news ? 
 grumio . whi , 'jack boy ! ho , boy ! ' and as much news as thou wilt . 
 curti . come , you are so full of cony-catch ! 
 grumio . whi , therefor , fire ; for i have caught extrem cold . 
 where 's the cook ? is supper readi , the hous trimm 'd , rush 
 strew 'd , cobweb swept , the serving-men in their new fustian , 
 their white stock , and everi offic hi wedding-gar on ? 
 be the jack fair within , the jill fair without , the carpet 
 laid , and everyth in order ? 
 curti . all readi ; and therefor , i pray thee , news . 
 grumio . first know my hors is tire ; my master and mistress fall'n 
 out . 
 curti . how ? 
 grumio . out of their saddl into the dirt ; and therebi hang a 
 tale . 
 curti . let 's ha't , good grumio . 
 grumio . lend thine ear . 
 curti . here . 
 grumio . there . [ strike him ] 
 curti . thi 't is to feel a tale , not to hear a tale . 
 grumio . and therefor 't is call 'd a sensibl tale ; and thi cuff 
 wa but to knock at your car and beseech list'n . now i begin : 
 imprimi , we came down a foul hill , my master ride behind my 
 mistress- 
 curti . both of one hors ? 
 grumio . what 's that to thee ? 
 curti . whi , a hors . 
 grumio . tell thou the tale . but hadst thou not cross 'd me , thou 
 shouldst have heard how her hors fell and she under her hors ; 
 thou shouldst have heard in how miri a place , how she wa 
 bemoil 'd , how he left her with the hors upon her , how he beat me 
 becaus her hors stumbl , how she wade through the dirt to 
 pluck him off me , how he swore , how she pray 'd that never pray 'd 
 befor , how i cri , how the hors ran away , how her bridl wa 
 burst , how i lost my crupper- with mani thing of worthi memori , 
 which now shall die in oblivion , and thou return unexperienc 'd to 
 thi grave . 
 curti . by thi reck'n he is more shrew than she . 
 grumio . ay , and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find 
 when he come home . but what talk i of thi ? call forth 
 nathaniel , joseph , nichola , philip , walter , sugarsop , and the 
 rest ; let their head be sleekli comb 'd , their blue coat brush 'd 
 and their garter of an indiffer knit ; let them curtsi with 
 their left leg , and not presum to touch a hair of my mastcr 's 
 horse-tail till they kiss their hand . are they all readi ? 
 curti . they are . 
 grumio . call them forth . 
 curti . do you hear , ho ? you must meet my master , to counten my 
 mistress . 
 grumio . whi , she hath a face of her own . 
 curti . who know not that ? 
 grumio . thou , it seem , that call for compani to counten her . 
 curti . i call them forth to credit her . 
 grumio . whi , she come to borrow noth of them . 
 
 enter four or five servingmen 
 
 nathaniel . welcom home , grumio ! 
 philip . how now , grumio ! 
 joseph . what , grumio ! 
 nichola . fellow grumio ! 
 nathaniel . how now , old lad ! 
 grumio . welcom , you ! - how now , you ! - what , you ! - fellow , you ! - and 
 thu much for greet . now , my spruce companion , is all readi , 
 and all thing neat ? 
 nathaniel . all thing is readi . how near is our master ? 
 grumio . e'en at hand , alight by thi ; and therefor be not- 
 cock 's passion , silenc ! i hear my master . 
 
 enter petruchio and katherina 
 
 petruchio . where be these knave ? what , no man at door 
 to hold my stirrup nor to take my hors ! 
 where is nathaniel , gregori , philip ? 
 all servant . here , here , sir ; here , sir . 
 petruchio . here , sir ! here , sir ! here , sir ! here , sir ! 
 you logger-head and unpolish 'd groom ! 
 what , no attend ? no regard ? no duti ? 
 where is the foolish knave i sent befor ? 
 grumio . here , sir ; as foolish as i wa befor . 
 petruchio . you peasant swain ! you whoreson malt-hors drudg ! 
 did i not bid thee meet me in the park 
 and bring along these rascal knave with thee ? 
 grumio . nathaniel 's coat , sir , wa not fulli made , 
 and gabriel 's pump were all unpink 'd i ' th ' heel ; 
 there wa no link to colour peter 's hat , 
 and walter 's dagger wa not come from sheath ; 
 there were none fine but adam , ralph , and gregori ; 
 the rest were rag , old , and beggarli ; 
 yet , as they are , here are they come to meet you . 
 petruchio . go , rascal , go and fetch my supper in . 
 exeunt some of the servingmen 
 
 [ sing ] where is the life that late i led ? 
 where are those- 
 
 sit down , kate , and welcom . soud , soud , soud , soud ! 
 
 re-ent servant with supper 
 
 whi , when , i say ? nay , good sweet kate , be merri . 
 off with my boot , you rogu ! you villain , when ? 
 
 [ sing ] it wa the friar of order grey , 
 as he forth walk on hi way- 
 
 out , you rogu ! you pluck my foot awri ; 
 take that , and mend the pluck off the other . 
 [ strike him ] 
 be merri , kate . some water , here , what , ho ! 
 
 enter one with water 
 
 where 's my spaniel troilu ? sirrah , get you henc , 
 and bid my cousin ferdinand come hither : 
 exit servingman 
 one , kate , that you must kiss and be acquaint with . 
 where are my slipper ? shall i have some water ? 
 come , kate , and wash , and welcom heartili . 
 you whoreson villain ! will you let it fall ? [ strike him ] 
 katherina . patienc , i pray you ; 't wa a fault unwil . 
 petruchio . a whoreson , beetle-head , flap-ear 'd knave ! 
 come , kate , sit down ; i know you have a stomach . 
 will you give thank , sweet kate , or els shall i ? 
 what 's thi ? mutton ? 
 first servant . ay . 
 petruchio . who brought it ? 
 peter . i . 
 petruchio . 't is burnt ; and so is all the meat . 
 what dog are these ? where is the rascal cook ? 
 how durst you villain bring it from the dresser 
 and serv it thu to me that love it not ? 
 there , take it to you , trencher , cup , and all ; 
 [ throw the meat , etc. , at them ] 
 you heedless jolthead and unmann 'd slave ! 
 what , do you grumbl ? i 'll be with you straight . 
 exeunt servant 
 katherina . i pray you , husband , be not so disquiet ; 
 the meat wa well , if you were so content . 
 petruchio . i tell thee , kate , 't wa burnt and dri away , 
 and i expressli am forbid to touch it ; 
 for it engend choler , planteth anger ; 
 and better 'twere that both of us did fast , 
 sinc , of ourselv , ourselv are choler , 
 than feed it with such over-roast flesh . 
 be patient ; to-morrow 't shall be mend . 
 and for thi night we 'll fast for compani . 
 come , i will bring thee to thi bridal chamber . exeunt 
 
 re-ent servant sever 
 
 nathaniel . peter , didst ever see the like ? 
 peter . he kill her in her own humour . 
 
 re-ent curti 
 
 grumio . where is he ? 
 curti . in her chamber . make a sermon of contin to her , 
 and rail , and swear , and rate , that she , poor soul , 
 know not which way to stand , to look , to speak . 
 and sit as one new risen from a dream . 
 away , away ! for he is come hither . exeunt 
 
 re-ent petruchio 
 
 petruchio . thu have i politicli begun my reign , 
 and 't is my hope to end success . 
 my falcon now is sharp and pass empti . 
 and till she stoop she must not be full-gorg 'd , 
 for then she never look upon her lure . 
 anoth way i have to man my haggard , 
 to make her come , and know her keeper 's call , 
 that is , to watch her , as we watch these kite 
 that bate and beat , and will not be obedi . 
 she eat no meat to-day , nor none shall eat ; 
 last night she slept not , nor to-night she shall not ; 
 as with the meat , some undeserv fault 
 i 'll find about the make of the bed ; 
 and here i 'll fling the pillow , there the bolster , 
 thi way the coverlet , anoth way the sheet ; 
 ay , and amid thi hurli i intend 
 that all is done in reverend care of her- 
 and , in conclus , she shall watch all night ; 
 and if she chanc to nod i 'll rail and brawl 
 and with the clamour keep her still awak . 
 thi is a way to kill a wife with kind , 
 and thu i 'll curb her mad and headstrong humour . 
 he that know better how to tame a shrew , 
 now let him speak ; 't is chariti to show . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 padua . befor baptista 's hous 
 
 enter tranio as lucentio , and hortensio as licio 
 
 tranio . is 't possibl , friend licio , that mistress bianca 
 doth fanci ani other but lucentio ? 
 i tell you , sir , she bear me fair in hand . 
 hortensio . sir , to satisfi you in what i have said , 
 stand by and mark the manner of hi teach . 
 [ they stand asid ] 
 
 enter bianca , and lucentio as cambio 
 
 lucentio . now , mistress , profit you in what you read ? 
 bianca . what , master , read you , first resolv me that . 
 lucentio . i read that i profess , 'the art to love . ' 
 bianca . and may you prove , sir , master of your art ! 
 lucentio . while you , sweet dear , prove mistress of my heart . 
 [ they retir ] 
 hortensio . quick proceed , marri ! now tell me , i pray , 
 you that durst swear that your mistress blanca 
 lov 'd none in the world so well as lucentio . 
 tranio . o despit love ! unconst womankind ! 
 i tell thee , licio , thi is wonder . 
 hortensio . mistak no more ; i am not licio . 
 nor a musician as i seem to be ; 
 but one that scorn to live in thi disguis 
 for such a one as leav a gentleman 
 and make a god of such a cullion . 
 know , sir , that i am call 'd hortensio . 
 tranio . signior hortensio , i have often heard 
 of your entir affect to bianca ; 
 and sinc mine eye are wit of her light , 
 i will with you , if you be so content , 
 forswear bianca and her love for ever . 
 hortensio . see , how they kiss and court ! signior lucentio , 
 here is my hand , and here i firmli vow 
 never to woo her more , but do forswear her , 
 as one unworthi all the former favour 
 that i have fondli flatter 'd her withal . 
 tranio . and here i take the like unfeign oath , 
 never to marri with her though she would entreat ; 
 fie on her ! see how beastli she doth court him ! 
 hortensio . would all the world but he had quit forsworn ! 
 for me , that i may sure keep mine oath , 
 i will be marri to a wealtlli widow 
 ere three day pass , which hath as long lov 'd me 
 as i have lov 'd thi proud disdain haggard . 
 and so farewel , signior lucentio . 
 kind in women , not their beauteou look , 
 shall win my love ; and so i take my leav , 
 in resolut as i swore befor . exit 
 tranio . mistress bianca , bless you with such grace 
 as 'longeth to a lover 's bless case ! 
 nay , i have ta'en you nap , gentl love , 
 and have forsworn you with hortensio . 
 bianca . tranio , you jest ; but have you both forsworn me ? 
 tranio . mistress , we have . 
 lucentio . then we are rid of licio . 
 tranio . i ' faith , he 'll have a lusti widow now , 
 that shall be woo 'd and wed in a day . 
 bianca . god give him joy ! 
 tranio . ay , and he 'll tame her . 
 bianca . he say so , tranio . 
 tranio . faith , he is gone unto the taming-school . 
 bianca . the taming-school ! what , is there such a place ? 
 tranio . ay , mistress ; and petruchio is the master , 
 that teacheth trick eleven and twenti long , 
 to tame a shrew and charm her chatter tongu . 
 
 enter biondello 
 
 biondello . o master , master , have watch 'd so long 
 that i am dog-weari ; but at last i spi 
 an ancient angel come down the hill 
 will serv the turn . 
 tranio . what is he , biondello ? 
 biondello . master , a mercatant or a pedant , 
 i know not what ; but formal in apparel , 
 in gait and counten sure like a father . 
 lucentio . and what of him , tranio ? 
 tranio . if he be credul and trust my tale , 
 i 'll make him glad to seem vincentio , 
 and give assur to baptista minola 
 as if he were the right vincentio . 
 take in your love , and then let me alon . 
 exeunt lucentio and bianca 
 
 enter a pedant 
 
 pedant . god save you , sir ! 
 tranio . and you , sir ; you are welcom . 
 travel you far on , or are you at the farthest ? 
 pedant . sir , at the farthest for a week or two ; 
 but then up farther , and as far as rome ; 
 and so to tripoli , if god lend me life . 
 tranio . what countryman , i pray ? 
 pedant . of mantua . 
 tranio . of mantua , sir ? marri , god forbid , 
 and come to padua , careless of your life ! 
 pedant . my life , sir ! how , i pray ? for that goe hard . 
 tranio . 't is death for ani one in mantua 
 to come to padua . know you not the caus ? 
 your ship are stay 'd at venic ; and the duke , 
 for privat quarrel 'twixt your duke and him , 
 hath publish 'd and proclaim 'd it openli . 
 't is marvel- but that you are but newli come , 
 you might have heard it els proclaim 'd about . 
 pedant . ala , sir , it is wors for me than so ! 
 for i have bill for money by exchang 
 from florenc , and must here deliv them . 
 tranio . well , sir , to do you courtesi , 
 thi will i do , and thi i will advis you- 
 first , tell me , have you ever been at pisa ? 
 pedant . ay , sir , in pisa have i often been , 
 pisa renown for grave citizen . 
 tranio . among them know you one vincentio ? 
 pedant . i know him not , but i have heard of him , 
 a merchant of incompar wealth . 
 tranio . he is my father , sir ; and , sooth to say , 
 in count'nanc somewhat doth resembl you . 
 biondello . [ asid ] as much as an appl doth an oyster , and all 
 one . 
 tranio . to save your life in thi extrem , 
 thi favour will i do you for hi sake ; 
 and think it not the worst of all your fortun 
 that you are like to sir vincentio . 
 hi name and credit shall you undertak , 
 and in my hous you shall be friendli lodg 'd ; 
 look that you take upon you as you should . 
 you understand me , sir . so shall you stay 
 till you have done your busi in the citi . 
 if thi be court'si , sir , accept of it . 
 pedant . o , sir , i do ; and will reput you ever 
 the patron of my life and liberti . 
 tranio . then go with me to make the matter good . 
 thi , by the way , i let you understand : 
 my father is here look 'd for everi day 
 to pass assur of a dow ' r in marriag 
 'twixt me and one baptista 's daughter here . 
 in all these circumst i 'll instruct you . 
 go with me to cloth you as becom you . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 petruchio 's hous 
 
 enter katherina and grumio 
 
 grumio . no , no , forsooth ; i dare not for my life . 
 katherina . the more my wrong , the more hi spite appear . 
 what , did he marri me to famish me ? 
 beggar that come unto my father 's door 
 upon entreati have a present alm ; 
 if not , elsewher they meet with chariti ; 
 but i , who never knew how to entreat , 
 nor never need that i should entreat , 
 am starv 'd for meat , giddi for lack of sleep ; 
 with oath kept wake , and with brawl fed ; 
 and that which spite me more than all these wants- 
 he doe it under name of perfect love ; 
 as who should say , if i should sleep or eat , 
 'twere deadli sick or els present death . 
 i prithe go and get me some repast ; 
 i care not what , so it be wholesom food . 
 grumio . what say you to a neat 's foot ? 
 katherina . 't is pass good ; i prithe let me have it . 
 grumio . i fear it is too choler a meat . 
 how say you to a fat tripe fine broil 'd ? 
 katherina . i like it well ; good grumio , fetch it me . 
 grumio . i can not tell ; i fear 't is choler . 
 what say you to a piec of beef and mustard ? 
 katherina . a dish that i do love to feed upon . 
 grumio . ay , but the mustard is too hot a littl . 
 katherina . whi then the beef , and let the mustard rest . 
 grumio . nay , then i will not ; you shall have the mustard , 
 or els you get no beef of grumio . 
 katherina . then both , or one , or anyth thou wilt . 
 grumio . whi then the mustard without the beef . 
 katherina . go , get thee gone , thou fals delud slave , 
 [ beat him ] 
 that feed'st me with the veri name of meat . 
 sorrow on thee and all the pack of you 
 that triumph thu upon my miseri ! 
 go , get thee gone , i say . 
 
 enter petruchio , and hortensio with meat 
 
 petruchio . how fare my kate ? what , sweet , all amort ? 
 hortensio . mistress , what cheer ? 
 katherina . faith , as cold as can be . 
 petruchio . pluck up thi spirit , look cheer upon me . 
 here , love , thou seest how dilig i am , 
 to dress thi meat myself , and bring it thee . 
 i am sure , sweet kate , thi kind merit thank . 
 what , not a word ? nay , then thou lov'st it not , 
 and all my pain is sort to no proof . 
 here , take away thi dish . 
 katherina . i pray you , let it stand . 
 petruchio . the poorest servic is repaid with thank ; 
 and so shall mine , befor you touch the meat . 
 katherina . i thank you , sir . 
 hortensio . signior petruchio , fie ! you are to blame . 
 come , mistress kate , i 'll bear you compani . 
 petruchio . [ asid ] eat it up all , hortensio , if thou lovest me.- 
 much good do it unto thi gentl heart ! 
 kate , eat apac . and now , my honey love , 
 will we return unto thi father 's hous 
 and revel it as brave as the best , 
 with silken coat and cap , and golden ring , 
 with ruff and cuff and farthingal and thing , 
 with scarf and fan and doubl chang of brav'ri . 
 with amber bracelet , bead , and all thi knav'ri . 
 what , hast thou din 'd ? the tailor stay thi leisur , 
 to deck thi bodi with hi ruffl treasur . 
 
 enter tailor 
 
 come , tailor , let us see these ornament ; 
 lay forth the gown . 
 
 enter haberdash 
 
 what news with you , sir ? 
 haberdash . here is the cap your worship did bespeak . 
 petruchio . whi , thi wa mould on a porring ; 
 a velvet dish . fie , fie ! 't is lewd and filthi ; 
 whi , 't is a cockl or a walnut-shel , 
 a knack , a toy , a trick , a babi 's cap . 
 away with it . come , let me have a bigger . 
 katherina . i 'll have no bigger ; thi doth fit the time , 
 and gentlewomen wear such cap as these . 
 petruchio . when you are gentl , you shall have one too , 
 and not till then . 
 hortensio . [ asid ] that will not be in hast . 
 katherina . whi , sir , i trust i may have leav to speak ; 
 and speak i will . i am no child , no babe . 
 your better have endur 'd me say my mind , 
 and if you can not , best you stop your ear . 
 my tongu will tell the anger of my heart , 
 or els my heart , conceal it , will break ; 
 and rather than it shall , i will be free 
 even to the uttermost , as i pleas , in word . 
 petruchio . whi , thou say'st true ; it is a paltri cap , 
 a custard-coffin , a baubl , a silken pie ; 
 i love thee well in that thou lik'st it not . 
 katherina . love me or love me not , i like the cap ; 
 and it i will have , or i will have none . exit haberdash 
 petruchio . thi gown ? whi , ay . come , tailor , let us see't . 
 o merci , god ! what masqu stuff is here ? 
 what 's thi ? a sleev ? 't is like a demi-cannon . 
 what , up and down , carv 'd like an appletart ? 
 here 's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash , 
 like to a censer in a barber 's shop . 
 whi , what a devil 's name , tailor , call'st thou thi ? 
 hortensio . [ asid ] i see she 's like to have neither cap nor gown . 
 tailor . you bid me make it orderli and well , 
 accord to the fashion and the time . 
 petruchio . marri , and did ; but if you be rememb'r , 
 i did not bid you mar it to the time . 
 go , hop me over everi kennel home , 
 for you shall hop without my custom , sir . 
 i 'll none of it ; henc ! make your best of it . 
 katherina . i never saw a better fashion 'd gown , 
 more quaint , more pleas , nor more commend ; 
 belik you mean to make a puppet of me . 
 petruchio . whi , true ; he mean to make a puppet of thee . 
 tailor . she say your worship mean to make a puppet of her . 
 petruchio . o monstrou arrog ! thou liest , thou thread , thou 
 thimbl , 
 thou yard , three-quart , half-yard , quarter , nail , 
 thou flea , thou nit , thou winter-cricket thou- 
 brav 'd in mine own hous with a skein of thread ! 
 away , thou rag , thou quantiti , thou remnant ; 
 or i shall so bemet thee with thi yard 
 as thou shalt think on prate whilst thou liv'st ! 
 i tell thee , i , that thou hast marr 'd her gown . 
 tailor . your worship is deceiv 'd ; the gown is made 
 just as my master had direct . 
 grumio gave order how it should be done . 
 grumio . i gave him no order ; i gave him the stuff . 
 tailor . but how did you desir it should be made ? 
 grumio . marri , sir , with needl and thread . 
 tailor . but did you not request to have it cut ? 
 grumio . thou hast fac 'd mani thing . 
 tailor . i have . 
 grumio . face not me . thou hast brav 'd mani men ; brave not me . i 
 will neither be fac 'd nor brav 'd . i say unto thee , i bid thi 
 master cut out the gown ; but i did not bid him cut it to piec . 
 ergo , thou liest . 
 tailor . whi , here is the note of the fashion to testifi . 
 petruchio . read it . 
 grumio . the note lie in 's throat , if he say i said so . 
 tailor . [ read ] 'imprimi , a loose-bodi gown'- 
 grumio . master , if ever i said loose-bodi gown , sew me in the 
 skirt of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown bread ; i 
 said a gown . 
 petruchio . proceed . 
 tailor . [ read ] 'with a small compass 'd cape'- 
 grumio . i confess the cape . 
 tailor . [ read ] 'with a trunk sleeve'- 
 grumio . i confess two sleev . 
 tailor . [ read ] 'the sleev curious cut . ' 
 petruchio . ay , there 's the villaini . 
 grumio . error i ' th ' bill , sir ; error i ' th ' bill ! i command the 
 sleev should be cut out , and sew 'd up again ; and that i 'll 
 prove upon thee , though thi littl finger be arm in a thimbl . 
 tailor . thi is true that i say ; an i had thee in place where , thou 
 shouldst know it . 
 grumio . i am for thee straight ; take thou the bill , give me thi 
 meteyard , and spare not me . 
 hortensio . god-a-merci , grumio ! then he shall have no odd . 
 petruchio . well , sir , in brief , the gown is not for me . 
 grumio . you are i ' th ' right , sir ; 't is for my mistress . 
 petruchio . go , take it up unto thi master 's use . 
 grumio . villain , not for thi life ! take up my mistress ' gown for 
 thi master 's use ! 
 petruchio . whi , sir , what 's your conceit in that ? 
 grumio . o , sir , the conceit is deeper than you think for . 
 take up my mistress ' gown to hi master 's use ! 
 o fie , fie , fie ! 
 petruchio . [ asid ] hortensio , say thou wilt see the tailor paid.- 
 go take it henc ; be gone , and say no more . 
 hortensio . tailor , i 'll pay thee for thi gown to-morrow ; 
 take no unkind of hi hasti word . 
 away , i say ; commend me to thi master . exit tailor 
 petruchio . well , come , my kate ; we will unto your father 's 
 even in these honest mean habili ; 
 our purs shall be proud , our garment poor ; 
 for 't is the mind that make the bodi rich ; 
 and as the sun break through the darkest cloud , 
 so honour peereth in the meanest habit . 
 what , is the jay more preciou than the lark 
 becaus hi feather are more beauti ? 
 or is the adder better than the eel 
 becaus hi paint skin content the eye ? 
 o no , good kate ; neither art thou the wors 
 for thi poor furnitur and mean array . 
 if thou account'st it shame , lay it on me ; 
 and therefor frolic ; we will henc forthwith 
 to feast and sport us at thi father 's hous . 
 go call my men , and let us straight to him ; 
 and bring our hors unto long-lan end ; 
 there will we mount , and thither walk on foot . 
 let 's see ; i think 't is now some seven o'clock , 
 and well we may come there by dinner-tim . 
 katherina . i dare assur you , sir , 't is almost two , 
 and 'twill be supper-tim ere you come there . 
 petruchio . it shall be seven ere i go to hors . 
 look what i speak , or do , or think to do , 
 you are still cross it . sir , let 't alon ; 
 i will not go to-day ; and ere i do , 
 it shall be what o'clock i say it is . 
 hortensio . whi , so thi gallant will command the sun . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 padua . befor baptista 's hous 
 
 enter tranio as lucentio , and the pedant dress like vincentio 
 
 tranio . sir , thi is the hous ; pleas it you that i call ? 
 pedant . ay , what els ? and , but i be deceiv , 
 signior baptista may rememb me 
 near twenti year ago in genoa , 
 where we were lodger at the pegasu . 
 tranio . 't is well ; and hold your own , in ani case , 
 with such auster as longeth to a father . 
 
 enter biondello 
 
 pedant . i warrant you . but , sir , here come your boy ; 
 'twere good he were school 'd . 
 tranio . fear you not him . sirrah biondello , 
 now do your duti throughli , i advis you . 
 imagin 'twere the right vincentio . 
 biondello . tut , fear not me . 
 tranio . but hast thou done thi errand to baptista ? 
 biondello . i told him that your father wa at venic , 
 and that you look 'd for him thi day in padua . 
 tranio . th'art a tall fellow ; hold thee that to drink . 
 here come baptista . set your counten , sir . 
 
 enter baptista , and lucentio as cambio 
 
 signior baptista , you are happili met . 
 [ to to the pedant ] sir , thi is the gentleman i told you of ; 
 i pray you stand good father to me now ; 
 give me bianca for my patrimoni . 
 pedant . soft , son ! 
 sir , by your leav : have come to padua 
 to gather in some debt , my son lucentio 
 made me acquaint with a weighti caus 
 of love between your daughter and himself ; 
 and- for the good report i hear of you , 
 and for the love he beareth to your daughter , 
 and she to him- to stay him not too long , 
 i am content , in a good father 's care , 
 to have him match 'd ; and , if you pleas to like 
 no wors than i , upon some agreement 
 me shall you find readi and will 
 with one consent to have her so bestow 'd ; 
 for curiou i can not be with you , 
 signior baptista , of whom i hear so well . 
 baptista . sir , pardon me in what i have to say . 
 your plain and your short pleas me well . 
 right true it is your son lucentio here 
 doth love my daughter , and she loveth him , 
 or both dissembl deepli their affect ; 
 and therefor , if you say no more than thi , 
 that like a father you will deal with him , 
 and pass my daughter a suffici dower , 
 the match is made , and all is done- 
 your son shall have my daughter with consent . 
 tranio . i thank you , sir . where then do you know best 
 we be affi , and such assur ta'en 
 as shall with either part 's agreement stand ? 
 baptista . not in my hous , lucentio , for you know 
 pitcher have ear , and i have mani servant ; 
 besid , old gremio is heark'n still , 
 and happili we might be interrupt . 
 tranio . then at my lodg , an it like you . 
 there doth my father lie ; and there thi night 
 we 'll pass the busi privat and well . 
 send for your daughter by your servant here ; 
 my boy shall fetch the scriven present . 
 the worst is thi , that at so slender warn 
 you are like to have a thin and slender pittanc . 
 baptista . it like me well . cambio , hie you home , 
 and bid bianca make her readi straight ; 
 and , if you will , tell what hath happened- 
 lucentio 's father is arriv 'd in padua , 
 and how she 's like to be lucentio 's wife . exit lucentio 
 biondello . i pray the god she may , with all my heart . 
 tranio . dalli not with the god , but get thee gone . 
 exit biondello 
 signior baptista , shall i lead the way ? 
 welcom ! one mess is like to be your cheer ; 
 come , sir ; we will better it in pisa . 
 baptista . i follow you . exeunt 
 
 re-ent lucentio as cambio , and biondello 
 
 biondello . cambio . 
 lucentio . what say'st thou , biondello ? 
 biondello . you saw my master wink and laugh upon you ? 
 lucentio . biondello , what of that ? 
 biondello . faith , noth ; but ha left me here behind to expound 
 the mean or moral of hi sign and token . 
 lucentio . i pray thee moral them . 
 biondello . then thu : baptista is safe , talk with the deceiv 
 father of a deceit son . 
 lucentio . and what of him ? 
 biondello . hi daughter is to be brought by you to the supper . 
 lucentio . and then ? 
 biondello . the old priest at saint luke 's church is at your command 
 at all hour . 
 lucentio . and what of all thi ? 
 biondello . i can not tell , except they are busi about a 
 counterfeit assur . take your assur of her , cum privilegio 
 ad imprimendum solum ; to th ' church take the priest , clerk , and 
 some suffici honest wit . 
 if thi be not that you look for , i have more to say , 
 but bid bianca farewel for ever and a day . 
 lucentio . hear'st thou , biondello ? 
 biondello . i can not tarri . i knew a wench marri in an afternoon 
 as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit ; and so 
 may you , sir ; and so adieu , sir . my master hath appoint me to 
 go to saint luke 's to bid the priest be readi to come against you 
 come with your appendix . 
 exit 
 lucentio . i may and will , if she be so content . 
 she will be plea 'd ; then wherefor should i doubt ? 
 hap what hap may , i 'll roundli go about her ; 
 it shall go hard if cambio go without her . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 a public road 
 
 enter petruchio , katherina , hortensio , and servant 
 
 petruchio . come on , a god 's name ; onc more toward our father 's . 
 good lord , how bright and goodli shine the moon ! 
 katherina . the moon ? the sun ! it is not moonlight now . 
 petruchio . i say it is the moon that shine so bright . 
 katherina . i know it is the sun that shine so bright . 
 petruchio . now by my mother 's son , and that 's myself , 
 it shall be moon , or star , or what i list , 
 or ere i journey to your father 's hous . 
 go on and fetch our hors back again . 
 evermor cross 'd and cross 'd ; noth but cross 'd ! 
 hortensio . say as he say , or we shall never go . 
 katherina . forward , i pray , sinc we have come so far , 
 and be it moon , or sun , or what you pleas ; 
 and if you pleas to call it a rush-candl , 
 henceforth i vow it shall be so for me . 
 petruchio . i say it is the moon . 
 katherina . i know it is the moon . 
 petruchio . nay , then you lie ; it is the bless sun . 
 katherina . then , god be bless 'd , it is the bless sun ; 
 but sun it is not , when you say it is not ; 
 and the moon chang even as your mind . 
 what you will have it nam 'd , even that it is , 
 and so it shall be so for katherin . 
 hortensio . petruchio , go thi way , the field is won . 
 petruchio . well , forward , forward ! thu the bowl should run , 
 and not unluckili against the bia . 
 but , soft ! compani is come here . 
 
 enter vincentio 
 
 [ to vincentio ] good-morrow , gentl mistress ; where away ? - 
 tell me , sweet kate , and tell me truli too , 
 hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman ? 
 such war of white and red within her cheek ! 
 what star do spangl heaven with such beauti 
 as those two eye becom that heavenli face ? 
 fair love maid , onc more good day to thee . 
 sweet kate , embrac her for her beauti 's sake . 
 hortensio . ' a will make the man mad , to make a woman of him . 
 katherina . young bud virgin , fair and fresh and sweet , 
 whither away , or where is thi abod ? 
 happi the parent of so fair a child ; 
 happier the man whom favour star 
 allot thee for hi love bed-fellow . 
 petruchio . whi , how now , kate , i hope thou art not mad ! 
 thi is a man , old , wrinkl , fade , wither , 
 and not a maiden , as thou sayst he is . 
 katherina . pardon , old father , my mistak eye , 
 that have been so bedazzl with the sun 
 that everyth i look on seemeth green ; 
 now i perceiv thou art a reverend father . 
 pardon , i pray thee , for my mad mistak . 
 petruchio . do , good old grandsir , and withal make known 
 which way thou travellest- if along with us , 
 we shall be joy of thi compani . 
 vincentio . fair sir , and you my merri mistress , 
 that with your strang encount much amaz 'd me , 
 my name is call 'd vincentio , my dwell pisa , 
 and bound i am to padua , there to visit 
 a son of mine , which long i have not seen . 
 petruchio . what is hi name ? 
 vincentio . lucentio , gentl sir . 
 petruchio . happili met ; the happier for thi son . 
 and now by law , as well as reverend age , 
 i may entitl thee my love father : 
 the sister to my wife , thi gentlewoman , 
 thi son by thi hath marri . wonder not , 
 nor be not grieved- she is of good esteem , 
 her dowri wealthi , and of worthi birth ; 
 besid , so qualifi as may beseem 
 the spous of ani nobl gentleman . 
 let me embrac with old vincentio ; 
 and wander we to see thi honest son , 
 who will of thi arriv be full joyou . 
 vincentio . but is thi true ; or is it els your pleasur , 
 like pleasant travel , to break a jest 
 upon the compani you overtak ? 
 hortensio . i do assur thee , father , so it is . 
 petruchio . come , go along , and see the truth hereof ; 
 for our first merriment hath made thee jealou . 
 exeunt all but hortensio 
 hortensio . well , petruchio , thi ha put me in heart . 
 have to my widow ; and if she be froward , 
 then hast thou taught hortensio to be untoward . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 padua . befor lucentio 's hous 
 
 enter biondello , lucentio , and bianca ; gremio is out befor 
 
 biondello . softli and swiftli , sir , for the priest is readi . 
 lucentio . i fli , biondello ; but they may chanc to need the at 
 home , therefor leav us . 
 biondello . nay , faith , i 'll see the church a your back , and then 
 come back to my master 's as soon as i can . 
 exeunt lucentio , bianca , and biondello 
 gremio . i marvel cambio come not all thi while . 
 
 enter petruchio , katherina , vincentio , grumio , 
 and attend 
 
 petruchio . sir , here 's the door ; thi is lucentio 's hous ; 
 my father 's bear more toward the market-plac ; 
 thither must i , and here i leav you , sir . 
 vincentio . you shall not choos but drink befor you go ; 
 i think i shall command your welcom here , 
 and by all likelihood some cheer is toward . [ knock ] 
 gremio . they 're busi within ; you were best knock louder . 
 [ pedant look out of the window ] 
 pedant . what 's he that knock as he would beat down the gate ? 
 vincentio . is signior lucentio within , sir ? 
 pedant . he 's within , sir , but not to be spoken withal . 
 vincentio . what if a man bring him a hundr pound or two to make 
 merri withal ? 
 pedant . keep your hundr pound to yourself ; he shall need none so 
 long as i live . 
 petruchio . nay , i told you your son wa well belov in padua . do 
 you hear , sir ? to leav frivol circumst , i pray you tell 
 signior lucentio that hi father is come from pisa , and is here 
 at the door to speak with him . 
 pedant . thou liest : hi father is come from padua , and here look 
 out at the window . 
 vincentio . art thou hi father ? 
 pedant . ay , sir ; so hi mother say , if i may believ her . 
 petruchio . [ to vincentio ] whi , how now , gentleman ! 
 whi , thi is flat knaveri to take upon you anoth man 's name . 
 pedant . lay hand on the villain ; i believ ' a mean to cozen 
 somebodi in thi citi under my counten . 
 
 re-ent biondello 
 
 biondello . i have seen them in the church togeth . god send 'em 
 good ship ! but who is here ? mine old master , vicentio ! now we 
 are undon and brought to noth . 
 vincentio . [ see biondello ] come hither , crack-hemp . 
 biondello . i hope i may choos , sir . 
 vincentio . come hither , you rogu . what , have you forgot me ? 
 biondello . forgot you ! no , sir . i could not forget you , for i never 
 saw you befor in all my life . 
 vincentio . what , you notori villain , didst thou never see thi 
 master 's father , vincentio ? 
 biondello . what , my old worship old master ? ye , marri , sir ; see 
 where he look out of the window . 
 vincentio . is't so , inde ? [ he beat biondello ] 
 biondello . help , help , help ! here 's a madman will murder me . 
 exit 
 pedant . help , son ! help , signior baptista ! exit from abov 
 petruchio . prithe , kate , let 's stand asid and see the end of thi 
 controversi . [ they stand asid ] 
 
 re-ent pedant below ; baptista , tranio , and servant 
 
 tranio . sir , what are you that offer to beat my servant ? 
 vincentio . what am i , sir ? nay , what are you , sir ? o immort god ! 
 o fine villain ! a silken doublet , a velvet hose , a scarlet cloak , 
 and a copatain hat ! o , i am undon ! i am undon ! while i play the 
 good husband at home , my son and my servant spend all at the 
 univers . 
 tranio . how now ! what 's the matter ? 
 baptista . what , is the man lunat ? 
 tranio . sir , you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit , but 
 your word show you a madman . whi , sir , what 'cern it you if i 
 wear pearl and gold ? i thank my good father , i am abl to 
 maintain it . 
 vincentio . thi father ! o villain ! he is a sailmak in bergamo . 
 baptista . you mistak , sir ; you mistak , sir . pray , what do you 
 think is hi name ? 
 vincentio . hi name ! as if i knew not hi name ! i have brought him 
 up ever sinc he wa three year old , and hi name is tranio . 
 pedant . away , away , mad ass ! hi name is lucentio ; and he is mine 
 onli son , and heir to the land of me , signior vicentio . 
 vincentio . lucentio ! o , he hath murd'r hi master ! lay hold on 
 him , i charg you , in the duke 's name . o , my son , my son ! tell 
 me , thou villain , where is my son , lucentio ? 
 tranio . call forth an offic . 
 
 enter one with an offic 
 
 carri thi mad knave to the gaol . father baptista , i charg you 
 see that he be forthcom . 
 vincentio . carri me to the gaol ! 
 gremio . stay , offic ; he shall not go to prison . 
 baptista . talk not , signior gremio ; i say he shall go to prison . 
 gremio . take heed , signior baptista , lest you be cony-catch 'd in 
 thi busi ; i dare swear thi is the right vincentio . 
 pedant . swear if thou dar'st . 
 gremio . nay , i dare not swear it . 
 tranio . then thou wert best say that i am not lucentio . 
 gremio . ye , i know thee to be signior lucentio . 
 baptista . away with the dotard ; to the gaol with him ! 
 vincentio . thu stranger may be hal 'd and abu 'd . o monstrou 
 villain ! 
 
 re-ent biondello , with lucentio and bianca 
 
 biondello . o , we are spoil 'd ; and yonder he is ! deni him , forswear 
 him , or els we are all undon . 
 exeunt biondello , tranio , and pedant , as fast as may be 
 lucentio . [ kneel ] pardon , sweet father . 
 vincentio . live my sweet son ? 
 bianca . pardon , dear father . 
 baptista . how hast thou offend ? 
 where is lucentio ? 
 lucentio . here 's lucentio , 
 right son to the right vincentio , 
 that have by marriag made thi daughter mine , 
 while counterfeit suppos blear 'd thine eyn . 
 gremio . here 's pack , with a wit , to deceiv us all ! 
 vincentio . where is that damn villain , tranio , 
 that fac 'd and brav 'd me in thi matter so ? 
 baptista . whi , tell me , is not thi my cambio ? 
 bianca . cambio is chang 'd into lucentio . 
 lucentio . love wrought these miracl . bianca 's love 
 made me exchang my state with tranio , 
 while he did bear my counten in the town ; 
 and happili i have arriv at the last 
 unto the wish haven of my bliss . 
 what tranio did , myself enforc 'd him to ; 
 then pardon him , sweet father , for my sake . 
 vincentio . i 'll slit the villain 's nose that would have sent me to 
 the gaol . 
 baptista . [ to lucentio ] but do you hear , sir ? have you marri my 
 daughter without ask my good will ? 
 vincentio . fear not , baptista ; we will content you , go to ; but i 
 will in to be reveng for thi villaini . exit 
 baptista . and i to sound the depth of thi knaveri . exit 
 lucentio . look not pale , bianca ; thi father will not frown . 
 exeunt lucentio and bianca 
 gremio . my cake is dough , but i 'll in among the rest ; 
 out of hope of all but my share of the feast . exit 
 katherina . husband , let 's follow to see the end of thi ado . 
 petruchio . first kiss me , kate , and we will . 
 katherina . what , in the midst of the street ? 
 petruchio . what , art thou asham 'd of me ? 
 katherina . no , sir ; god forbid ; but asham 'd to kiss . 
 petruchio . whi , then , let 's home again . come , sirrah , let 's away . 
 katherina . nay , i will give thee a kiss ; now pray thee , love , stay . 
 petruchio . is not thi well ? come , my sweet kate : 
 better onc than never , for never too late . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 lucentio 's hous 
 
 enter baptista , vincentio , gremio , the pedant , lucentio , bianca , 
 petruchio , katherina , hortensio , and widow . the servingmen with tranio , 
 biondello , and grumio , bring in a banquet 
 
 lucentio . at last , though long , our jar note agre ; 
 and time it is when rage war is done 
 to smile at scape and peril overblown . 
 my fair bianca , bid my father welcom , 
 while i with self-sam kind welcom thine . 
 brother petruchio , sister katherina , 
 and thou , hortensio , with thi love widow , 
 feast with the best , and welcom to my hous . 
 my banquet is to close our stomach up 
 after our great good cheer . pray you , sit down ; 
 for now we sit to chat as well as eat . [ they sit ] 
 petruchio . noth but sit and sit , and eat and eat ! 
 baptista . padua afford thi kind , son petruchio . 
 petruchio . padua afford noth but what is kind . 
 hortensio . for both our sake i would that word were true . 
 petruchio . now , for my life , hortensio fear hi widow . 
 widow . then never trust me if i be afeard . 
 petruchio . you are veri sensibl , and yet you miss my sens : 
 i mean hortensio is afeard of you . 
 widow . he that is giddi think the world turn round . 
 petruchio . roundli repli . 
 katherina . mistress , how mean you that ? 
 widow . thu i conceiv by him . 
 petruchio . conceiv by me ! how like hortensio that ? 
 hortensio . my widow say thu she conceiv her tale . 
 petruchio . veri well mend . kiss him for that , good widow . 
 katherina . 'he that is giddi think the world turn round . ' 
 i pray you tell me what you meant by that . 
 widow . your husband , be troubl with a shrew , 
 measur my husband 's sorrow by hi woe ; 
 and now you know my mean . 
 katherina . a veri mean mean . 
 widow . right , i mean you . 
 katherina . and i am mean , inde , respect you . 
 petruchio . to her , kate ! 
 hortensio . to her , widow ! 
 petruchio . a hundr mark , my kate doe put her down . 
 hortensio . that 's my offic . 
 petruchio . spoke like an officer- ha ' to thee , lad . 
 [ drink to hortensio ] 
 baptista . how like gremio these quick-wit folk ? 
 gremio . believ me , sir , they butt togeth well . 
 bianca . head and butt ! an hasty-wit bodi 
 would say your head and butt were head and horn . 
 vincentio . ay , mistress bride , hath that awaken you ? 
 bianca . ay , but not fright me ; therefor i 'll sleep again . 
 petruchio . nay , that you shall not ; sinc you have begun , 
 have at you for a bitter jest or two . 
 bianca . am i your bird ? i mean to shift my bush , 
 and then pursu me as you draw your bow . 
 you are welcom all . 
 exeunt bianca , katherina , and widow 
 petruchio . she hath prevent me . here , signior tranio , 
 thi bird you aim 'd at , though you hit her not ; 
 therefor a health to all that shot and miss 'd . 
 tranio . o , sir , lucentio slipp 'd me like hi greyhound , 
 which run himself , and catch for hi master . 
 petruchio . a good swift simil , but someth currish . 
 tranio . 't is well , sir , that you hunt for yourself ; 
 't is thought your deer doe hold you at a bay . 
 baptista . o , o , petruchio ! tranio hit you now . 
 lucentio . i thank thee for that gird , good tranio . 
 hortensio . confess , confess ; hath he not hit you here ? 
 petruchio . ' a ha a littl gall 'd me , i confess ; 
 and , as the jest did glanc away from me , 
 't is ten to one it maim 'd you two outright . 
 baptista . now , in good sad , son petruchio , 
 i think thou hast the veriest shrew of all . 
 petruchio . well , i say no ; and therefor , for assur , 
 let 's each one send unto hi wife , 
 and he whose wife is most obedi , 
 to come at first when he doth send for her , 
 shall win the wager which we will propos . 
 hortensio . content . what 's the wager ? 
 lucentio . twenti crown . 
 petruchio . twenti crown ? 
 i 'll ventur so much of my hawk or hound , 
 but twenti time so much upon my wife . 
 lucentio . a hundr then . 
 hortensio . content . 
 petruchio . a match ! 't is done . 
 hortensio . who shall begin ? 
 lucentio . that will i . 
 go , biondello , bid your mistress come to me . 
 biondello . i go . exit 
 baptista . son , i 'll be your half bianca come . 
 lucentio . i 'll have no halv ; i 'll bear it all myself . 
 
 re-ent biondello 
 
 how now ! what news ? 
 biondello . sir , my mistress send you word 
 that she is busi and she can not come . 
 petruchio . how ! she 's busi , and she can not come ! 
 is that an answer ? 
 gremio . ay , and a kind one too . 
 pray god , sir , your wife send you not a wors . 
 petruchio . i hope better . 
 hortensio . sirrah biondello , go and entreat my wife 
 to come to me forthwith . exit biondello 
 petruchio . o , ho ! entreat her ! 
 nay , then she must need come . 
 hortensio . i am afraid , sir , 
 do what you can , your will not be entreat . 
 
 re-ent biondello 
 
 now , where 's my wife ? 
 biondello . she say you have some goodli jest in hand : 
 she will not come ; she bid you come to her . 
 petruchio . wors and wors ; she will not come ! o vile , 
 intoler , not to be endur 'd ! 
 sirrah grumio , go to your mistress ; 
 say i command her come to me . exit grumio 
 hortensio . i know her answer . 
 petruchio . what ? 
 hortensio . she will not . 
 petruchio . the fouler fortun mine , and there an end . 
 
 re-ent katherina 
 
 baptista . now , by my holidam , here come katherina ! 
 katherina . what is your sir , that you send for me ? 
 petruchio . where is your sister , and hortensio 's wife ? 
 katherina . they sit confer by the parlour fire . 
 petruchio . go , fetch them hither ; if they deni to come . 
 swing me them soundli forth unto their husband . 
 away , i say , and bring them hither straight . 
 exit katherina 
 lucentio . here is a wonder , if you talk of a wonder . 
 hortensio . and so it is . i wonder what it bode . 
 petruchio . marri , peac it bode , and love , and quiet life , 
 an aw rule , and right supremaci ; 
 and , to be short , what not that 's sweet and happi . 
 baptista . now fair befal thee , good petruchio ! 
 the wager thou hast won ; and i will ad 
 unto their loss twenti thousand crown ; 
 anoth dowri to anoth daughter , 
 for she is chang 'd , as she had never been . 
 petruchio . nay , i will win my wager better yet , 
 and show more sign of her obedi , 
 her new-built virtu and obedi . 
 
 re-ent katherina with bianca and widow 
 
 see where she come , and bring your froward wive 
 as prison to her womanli persuas . 
 katherin , that cap of your becom you not : 
 off with that baubl , throw it underfoot . 
 [ katherina compli ] 
 widow . lord , let me never have a caus to sigh 
 till i be brought to such a silli pass ! 
 bianca . fie ! what a foolish duti call you thi ? 
 lucentio . i would your duti were as foolish too ; 
 the wisdom of your duti , fair bianca , 
 hath cost me a hundr crown sinc supper-tim ! 
 bianca . the more fool you for lay on my duti . 
 petruchio . katherin , i charg thee , tell these headstrong women 
 what duti they do owe their lord and husband . 
 widow . come , come , you 're mock ; we will have no tell . 
 petruchio . come on , i say ; and first begin with her . 
 widow . she shall not . 
 petruchio . i say she shall . and first begin with her . 
 katherina . fie , fie ! unknit that threaten unkind brow , 
 and dart not scorn glanc from those eye 
 to wound thi lord , thi king , thi governor . 
 it blot thi beauti as frost do bite the mead , 
 confound thi fame as whirlwind shake fair bud , 
 and in no sens is meet or amiabl . 
 a woman mov 'd is like a fountain troubled- 
 muddi , ill-seem , thick , bereft of beauti ; 
 and while it is so , none so dri or thirsti 
 will deign to sip or touch one drop of it . 
 thi husband is thi lord , thi life , thi keeper , 
 thi head , thi sovereign ; one that care for thee , 
 and for thi mainten commit hi bodi 
 to pain labour both by sea and land , 
 to watch the night in storm , the day in cold , 
 whilst thou liest warm at home , secur and safe ; 
 and crave no other tribut at thi hand 
 but love , fair look , and true obedience- 
 too littl payment for so great a debt . 
 such duti as the subject owe the princ , 
 even such a woman oweth to her husband ; 
 and when she is froward , peevish , sullen , sour , 
 and not obedi to hi honest will , 
 what is she but a foul contend rebel 
 and graceless traitor to her love lord ? 
 i am asham 'd that women are so simpl 
 to offer war where they should kneel for peac ; 
 or seek for rule , supremaci , and sway , 
 when they are bound to serv , love , and obey . 
 whi are our bodi soft and weak and smooth , 
 unapt to toll and troubl in the world , 
 but that our soft condit and our heart 
 should well agre with our extern part ? 
 come , come , you froward and unabl worin ! 
 my mind hath been as big as one of your , 
 my heart as great , my reason hapli more , 
 to bandi word for word and frown for frown ; 
 but now i see our lanc are but straw , 
 our strength as weak , our weak past compar , 
 that seem to be most which we inde least are . 
 then vail your stomach , for it is no boot , 
 and place your hand below your husband 's foot ; 
 in token of which duti , if he pleas , 
 my hand is readi , may it do him eas . 
 petruchio . whi , there 's a wench ! come on , and kiss me , kate . 
 lucentio . well , go thi way , old lad , for thou shalt ha't . 
 vincentio . 't is a good hear when children are toward . 
 lucentio . but a harsh hear when women are froward . 
 petruchio . come , kate , we 'll to bed . 
 we three are marri , but you two are sped . 
 [ to lucentio ] 't wa i won the wager , though you hit the white ; 
 and be a winner , god give you good night ! 
 exeunt petruchio and katherina 
 hortensio . now go thi way ; thou hast tam 'd a curst shrow . 
 lucentio . 't is a wonder , by your leav , she will be tam 'd so . 
 exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the tempest 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 caiu marciu , afterward caiu marciu coriolanu 
 
 gener against the volscian 
 titu lartiu 
 cominiu 
 
 meneniu agrippa , friend to coriolanu 
 
 tribun of the peopl 
 siciniu velutu 
 juniu brutu 
 
 young marciu , son to coriolanu 
 a roman herald 
 nicanor , a roman 
 tullu aufidiu , gener of the volscian 
 lieuten , to aufidiu 
 conspir , with aufidiu 
 adrian , a volscian 
 a citizen of antium 
 two volscian guard 
 
 volumnia , mother to coriolanu 
 virgilia , wife to coriolanu 
 valeria , friend to virgilia 
 gentlewoman attend on virgilia 
 
 roman and volscian senat , patrician , aedil , lictor , 
 soldier , citizen , messeng , servant to aufidiu , and other 
 attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 rome and the neighbourhood ; corioli and the neighbourhood ; antium 
 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 rome . a street 
 
 enter a compani of mutin citizen , with stave , club , and other weapon 
 
 first citizen . befor we proceed ani further , hear me speak . 
 all . speak , speak . 
 first citizen . you are all resolv 'd rather to die than to famish ? 
 all . resolv 'd , resolv 'd . 
 first citizen . first , you know caiu marciu is chief enemi to the 
 peopl . 
 all . we know't , we know't . 
 first citizen . let us kill him , and we 'll have corn at our own 
 price . is't a verdict ? 
 all . no more talk o n't ; let it be done . away , away ! 
 second citizen . one word , good citizen . 
 first citizen . we are account poor citizen , the patrician good . 
 what author surfeit on would reliev us ; if they would yield 
 us but the superflu while it were wholesom , we might guess 
 they reliev us human ; but they think we are too dear . the 
 lean that afflict us , the object of our miseri , is as an 
 inventori to particular their abund ; our suffer is a 
 gain to them . let us reveng thi with our pike ere we becom 
 rake ; for the god know i speak thi in hunger for bread , not in 
 thirst for reveng . 
 second citizen . would you proceed especi against caiu marciu ? 
 first citizen . against him first ; he 's a veri dog to the 
 commonalti . 
 second citizen . consid you what servic he ha done for hi 
 countri ? 
 first citizen . veri well , and could be content to give him good 
 report for't but that he pay himself with be proud . 
 second citizen . nay , but speak not malici . 
 first citizen . i say unto you , what he hath done famous he did it 
 to that end ; though soft-conscienc 'd men can be content to say it 
 wa for hi countri , he did it to pleas hi mother and to be 
 partli proud , which he is , even to the altitud of hi virtu . 
 second citizen . what he can not help in hi natur you account a 
 vice in him . you must in no way say he is covet . 
 first citizen . if i must not , i need not be barren of accus ; 
 he hath fault , with surplu , to tire in repetit . [ shout 
 within ] what shout are these ? the other side o ' th ' citi is 
 risen . whi stay we prate here ? to th ' capitol ! 
 all . come , come . 
 first citizen . soft ! who come here ? 
 
 enter meneniu agrippa 
 
 second citizen . worthi meneniu agrippa ; one that hath alway lov 'd 
 the peopl . 
 first citizen . he 's one honest enough ; would all the rest were so ! 
 meneniu . what work 's , my countrymen , in hand ? where go you 
 with bat and club ? the matter ? speak , i pray you . 
 first citizen . our busi is not unknown to th ' senat ; they have 
 had inkl thi fortnight what we intend to do , which now we 'll 
 show 'em in deed . they say poor suitor have strong breath ; 
 they shall know we have strong arm too . 
 meneniu . whi , master , my good friend , mine honest neighbour , 
 will you undo yourselv ? 
 first citizen . we can not , sir ; we are undon alreadi . 
 meneniu . i tell you , friend , most charit care 
 have the patrician of you . for your want , 
 your suffer in thi dearth , you may as well 
 strike at the heaven with your stave as lift them 
 against the roman state ; whose cours will on 
 the way it take , crack ten thousand curb 
 of more strong link asund than can ever 
 appear in your impedi . for the dearth , 
 the god , not the patrician , make it , and 
 your knee to them , not arm , must help . alack , 
 you are transport by calam 
 thither where more attend you ; and you slander 
 the helm o ' th ' state , who care for you like father , 
 when you curs them as enemi . 
 first citizen . care for us ! true , inde ! they ne'er car 'd for us 
 yet . suffer us to famish , and their storehous cramm 'd with 
 grain ; make edict for usuri , to support usur ; repeal daili 
 ani wholesom act establish against the rich , and provid more 
 pierc statut daili to chain up and restrain the poor . if the 
 war eat us not up , they will ; and there 's all the love they bear 
 us . 
 meneniu . either you must 
 confess yourselv wondrou malici , 
 or be accu 'd of folli . i shall tell you 
 a pretti tale . it may be you have heard it ; 
 but , sinc it serv my purpos , i will ventur 
 to stale't a littl more . 
 first citizen . well , i 'll hear it , sir ; yet you must not think to 
 fob off our disgrac with a tale . but , a n't pleas you , deliv . 
 meneniu . there wa a time when all the bodi 's member 
 rebel 'd against the belli ; thu accu 'd it : 
 that onli like a gulf it did remain 
 i ' th ' midst o ' th ' bodi , idl and unact , 
 still cupboard the viand , never bear 
 like labour with the rest ; where th ' other instrument 
 did see and hear , devis , instruct , walk , feel , 
 and , mutual particip , did minist 
 unto the appetit and affect common 
 of the whole bodi . the belli answer'd- 
 first citizen . well , sir , what answer made the belli ? 
 meneniu . sir , i shall tell you . with a kind of smile , 
 which ne'er came from the lung , but even thus- 
 for look you , i may make the belli smile 
 as well as speak- it tauntingli repli 
 to th ' discont member , the mutin part 
 that envi hi receipt ; even so most fitli 
 as you malign our senat for that 
 they are not such as you . 
 first citizen . your belli 's answer- what ? 
 the kingli crown head , the vigil eye , 
 the counsellor heart , the arm our soldier , 
 our steed the leg , the tongu our trumpet , 
 with other muniment and petti help 
 is thi our fabric , if that they- 
 meneniu . what then ? 
 fore me , thi fellow speak ! what then ? what then ? 
 first citizen . should by the cormor belli be restrain 'd , 
 who is the sink o ' th ' body- 
 meneniu . well , what then ? 
 first citizen . the former agent , if they did complain , 
 what could the belli answer ? 
 meneniu . i will tell you ; 
 if you 'll bestow a small- of what you have little- 
 patienc awhil , you'st hear the belli 's answer . 
 first citizen . y'are long about it . 
 meneniu . note me thi , good friend : 
 your most grave belli wa deliber , 
 not rash like hi accus , and thu answer . 
 'true is it , my incorpor friend , ' quoth he 
 'that i receiv the gener food at first 
 which you do live upon ; and fit it is , 
 becaus i am the storehous and the shop 
 of the whole bodi . but , if you do rememb , 
 i send it through the river of your blood , 
 even to the court , the heart , to th ' seat o ' th ' brain ; 
 and , through the crank and offic of man , 
 the strongest nerv and small inferior vein 
 from me receiv that natur compet 
 wherebi they live . and though that all at onc 
 you , my good friends'- thi say the belli ; mark me . 
 first citizen . ay , sir ; well , well . 
 meneniu . 'though all at onc can not 
 see what i do deliv out to each , 
 yet i can make my audit up , that all 
 from me do back receiv the flour of all , 
 and leav me but the bran . ' what say you to ' t ? 
 first citizen . it wa an answer . how appli you thi ? 
 meneniu . the senat of rome are thi good belli , 
 and you the mutin member ; for , examin 
 their counsel and their care , digest thing rightli 
 touch the weal o ' th ' common , you shall find 
 no public benefit which you receiv 
 but it proce or come from them to you , 
 and no way from yourselv . what do you think , 
 you , the great toe of thi assembl ? 
 first citizen . i the great toe ? whi the great toe ? 
 meneniu . for that , be one o ' th ' lowest , basest , poorest , 
 of thi most wise rebellion , thou goest foremost . 
 thou rascal , that art worst in blood to run , 
 lead'st first to win some vantag . 
 but make you readi your stiff bat and club . 
 rome and her rat are at the point of battl ; 
 the one side must have bale . 
 
 enter caiu marciu 
 
 hail , nobl marciu ! 
 marciu . thank . what 's the matter , you dissenti rogu 
 that , rub the poor itch of your opinion , 
 make yourselv scab ? 
 first citizen . we have ever your good word . 
 marciu . he that will give good word to thee will flatter 
 beneath abhor . what would you have , you cur , 
 that like nor peac nor war ? the one affright you , 
 the other make you proud . he that trust to you , 
 where he should find you lion , find you hare ; 
 where fox , gees ; you are no surer , no , 
 than is the coal of fire upon the ice 
 or hailston in the sun . your virtu is 
 to make him worthi whose offenc subdu him , 
 and curs that justic did it . who deserv great 
 deserv your hate ; and your affect are 
 a sick man 's appetit , who desir most that 
 which would increas hi evil . he that depend 
 upon your favour swim with fin of lead , 
 and hew down oak with rush . hang ye ! trust ye ? 
 with everi minut you do chang a mind 
 and call him nobl that wa now your hate , 
 him vile that wa your garland . what 's the matter 
 that in these sever place of the citi 
 you cri against the nobl senat , who , 
 under the god , keep you in awe , which els 
 would feed on one anoth ? what 's their seek ? 
 meneniu . for corn at their own rate , whereof they say 
 the citi is well stor 'd . 
 marciu . hang 'em ! they say ! 
 they 'll sit by th ' fire and presum to know 
 what 's done i ' th ' capitol , who 's like to rise , 
 who thrive and who declin ; side faction , and give out 
 conjectur marriag , make parti strong , 
 and feebl such as stand not in their like 
 below their cobbl shoe . they say there 's grain enough ! 
 would the nobil lay asid their ruth 
 and let me use my sword , i 'd make a quarri 
 with thousand of these quarter 'd slave , as high 
 as i could pick my lanc . 
 meneniu . nay , these are almost thoroughli persuad ; 
 for though abundantli they lack discret , 
 yet are they pass cowardli . but , i beseech you , 
 what say the other troop ? 
 marciu . they are dissolv 'd . hang 'em ! 
 they said they were an-hungri ; sigh 'd forth proverbs- 
 that hunger broke stone wall , that dog must eat , 
 that meat wa made for mouth , that the god sent not 
 corn for the rich men onli . with these shred 
 they vent their complain ; which be answer 'd , 
 and a petit grant them- a strang one , 
 to break the heart of generos 
 and make bold power look pale- they threw their cap 
 as they would hang them on the horn o ' th ' moon , 
 shout their emul . 
 meneniu . what is grant them ? 
 marciu . five tribun , to defend their vulgar wisdom , 
 of their own choic . one 's juniu brutus- 
 siciniu velutu , and i know not . 'sdeath ! 
 the rabbl should have first unroof 'd the citi 
 ere so prevail 'd with me ; it will in time 
 win upon power and throw forth greater theme 
 for insurrect 's argu . 
 meneniu . thi is strang . 
 marciu . go get you home , you fragment . 
 
 enter a messeng , hastili 
 
 messeng . where 's caiu marciu ? 
 marciu . here . what 's the matter ? 
 messeng . the news is , sir , the volsc are in arm . 
 marciu . i am glad o n't ; then we shall ha ' mean to vent 
 our musti superflu . see , our best elder . 
 
 enter cominiu , titu lartiu , with other senat ; 
 juniu brutu and siciniu velutu 
 
 first senat . marciu , 't is true that you have late told us : 
 the volsc are in arm . 
 marciu . they have a leader , 
 tullu aufidiu , that will put you to't . 
 i sin in envi hi nobil ; 
 and were i anyth but what i am , 
 i would wish me onli he . 
 cominiu . you have fought togeth ? 
 marciu . were half to half the world by th ' ear , and he 
 upon my parti , i 'd revolt , to make 
 onli my war with him . he is a lion 
 that i am proud to hunt . 
 first senat . then , worthi marciu , 
 attend upon cominiu to these war . 
 cominiu . it is your former promis . 
 marciu . sir , it is ; 
 and i am constant . titu lartiu , thou 
 shalt see me onc more strike at tullu ' face . 
 what , art thou stiff ? stand'st out ? 
 lartiu . no , caiu marciu ; 
 i 'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other 
 ere stay behind thi busi . 
 meneniu . o , true bred ! 
 first senat . your compani to th ' capitol ; where , i know , 
 our greatest friend attend us . 
 lartiu . [ to cominiu ] lead you on . 
 [ to marciu ] follow cominiu ; we must follow you ; 
 right worthi you prioriti . 
 cominiu . nobl marciu ! 
 first senat . [ to the citizen ] henc to your home ; be gone . 
 marciu . nay , let them follow . 
 the volsc have much corn : take these rat thither 
 to gnaw their garner . worship mutin , 
 your valour put well forth ; pray follow . 
 ciitzen steal away . exeunt all but siciniu and brutu 
 siciniu . wa ever man so proud as is thi marciu ? 
 brutu . he ha no equal . 
 siciniu . when we were chosen tribun for the people- 
 brutu . mark 'd you hi lip and eye ? 
 siciniu . nay , but hi taunt ! 
 brutu . be mov 'd , he will not spare to gird the god . 
 siciniu . bemock the modest moon . 
 brutu . the present war devour him ! he is grown 
 too proud to be so valiant . 
 siciniu . such a natur , 
 tickl with good success , disdain the shadow 
 which he tread on at noon . but i do wonder 
 hi insol can brook to be command 
 under cominiu . 
 brutu . fame , at the which he aims- 
 in whom alreadi he is well grac'd- can not 
 better be held nor more attain 'd than by 
 a place below the first ; for what miscarri 
 shall be the gener 's fault , though he perform 
 to th ' utmost of a man , and giddi censur 
 will then cri out of marciu ' o , if he 
 had born the busi ! ' 
 siciniu . besid , if thing go well , 
 opinion , that so stick on marciu , shall 
 of hi demerit rob cominiu . 
 brutu . come . 
 half all cominiu ' honour are to marciu , 
 though marciu earn 'd them not ; and all hi fault 
 to marciu shall be honour , though inde 
 in aught he merit not . 
 siciniu . let 's henc and hear 
 how the dispatch is made , and in what fashion , 
 more than hi singular , he goe 
 upon thi present action . 
 brutu . let 's along . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 corioli . the senat hous . 
 
 enter tullu aufidiu with senat of corioli 
 
 first senat . so , your opinion is , aufidiu , 
 that they of rome are ent'r in our counsel 
 and know how we proceed . 
 aufidiu . is it not your ? 
 what ever have been thought on in thi state 
 that could be brought to bodili act ere rome 
 had circumvent ? 't is not four day gone 
 sinc i heard thenc ; these are the words- i think 
 i have the letter here ; .ye , here it is : 
 [ read ] 'they have press 'd a power , but it is not known 
 whether for east or west . the dearth is great ; 
 the peopl mutin ; and it is rumour 'd , 
 cominiu , marciu your old enemi , 
 who is of rome wors hate than of you , 
 and titu lartiu , a most valiant roman , 
 these three lead on thi prepar 
 whither 't is bent . most like 't is for you ; 
 consid of it . ' 
 first senat . our armi 's in the field ; 
 we never yet made doubt but rome wa readi 
 to answer us . 
 aufidiu . nor did you think it folli 
 to keep your great pretenc veil 'd till when 
 they need must show themselv ; which in the hatch , 
 it seem 'd , appear 'd to rome . by the discoveri 
 we shall be short'n in our aim , which wa 
 to take in mani town ere almost rome 
 should know we were afoot . 
 second senat . nobl aufidiu , 
 take your commiss ; hie you to your band ; 
 let us alon to guard corioli . 
 if they set down befor 's , for the remov 
 bring up your armi ; but i think you 'll find 
 th ' have not prepar 'd for us . 
 aufidiu . o , doubt not that ! 
 i speak from certainti . nay more , 
 some parcel of their power are forth alreadi , 
 and onli hitherward . i leav your honour . 
 if we and caiu marciu chanc to meet , 
 't is sworn between us we shall ever strike 
 till one can do no more . 
 all . the god assist you ! 
 aufidiu . and keep your honour safe ! 
 first senat . farewel . 
 second senat . farewel . 
 all . farewel . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 rome . marciu ' hous 
 
 enter volumnia and virgilia , mother and wife to marciu ; 
 they set them down on two low stool and sew 
 
 volumnia . i pray you , daughter , sing , or express yourself in a more 
 comfort sort . if my son were my husband , i should freelier 
 rejoic in that absenc wherein he won honour than in the 
 embrac of hi bed where he would show most love . when yet 
 he wa but tender-bodi , and the onli son of my womb ; when youth 
 with comeli pluck 'd all gaze hi way ; when , for a day of 
 king ' entreati , a mother should not sell him an hour from her 
 behold ; i , consid how honour would becom such a person- 
 that it wa no better than picture-lik to hang by th ' wall , if 
 renown made it not stir- wa plea 'd to let him seek danger where 
 he wa to find fame . to a cruel war i sent him , from whenc he 
 return 'd hi brow bound with oak . i tell thee , daughter , i 
 sprang not more in joy at first hear he wa a man-child than 
 now in first see he had prove himself a man . 
 virgilia . but had he die in the busi , madam , how then ? 
 volumnia . then hi good report should have been my son ; i therein 
 would have found issu . hear me profess sincer : had i a dozen 
 son , each in my love alik , and none less dear than thine and my 
 good marciu , i had rather had eleven die nobli for their countri 
 than one voluptu surfeit out of action . 
 
 enter a gentlewoman 
 
 gentlewoman . madam , the ladi valeria is come to visit you . 
 virgilia . beseech you give me leav to retir myself . 
 volumnia . inde you shall not . 
 methink i hear hither your husband 's drum ; 
 see him pluck aufidiu down by th ' hair ; 
 as children from a bear , the volsc shun him . 
 methink i see him stamp thu , and call thu : 
 'come on , you coward ! you were got in fear , 
 though you were born in rome . ' hi bloodi brow 
 with hi mail 'd hand then wipe , forth he goe , 
 like to a harvest-man that 's task 'd to mow 
 or all or lose hi hire . 
 virgilia . hi bloodi brow ? o jupit , no blood ! 
 volumnia . away , you fool ! it more becom a man 
 than gilt hi trophi . the breast of hecuba , 
 when she did suckl hector , look 'd not loveli 
 than hector 's forehead when it spit forth blood 
 at grecian sword , contemn . tell valeria 
 we are fit to bid her welcom . exit gentlewoman 
 virgilia . heaven bless my lord from fell aufidiu ! 
 volumnia . he 'll beat aufidiu ' head below hi knee 
 and tread upon hi neck . 
 
 re-ent gentlewoman , with valeria and an usher 
 
 valeria . my ladi both , good day to you . 
 volumnia . sweet madam ! 
 virgilia . i am glad to see your ladyship . 
 valeria . how do you both ? you are manifest housekeep . what are 
 you sew here ? a fine spot , in good faith . how doe your littl 
 son ? 
 virgilia . i thank your ladyship ; well , good madam . 
 volumnia . he had rather see the sword and hear a drum than look 
 upon hi schoolmast . 
 valeria . o ' my word , the father 's son ! i 'll swear 't is a veri 
 pretti boy . o ' my troth , i look 'd upon him a wednesday half an 
 hour togeth ; ha such a confirm 'd counten ! i saw him run 
 after a gild butterfli ; and when he caught it he let it go 
 again , and after it again , and over and over he come , and up 
 again , catch 'd it again ; or whether hi fall enrag 'd him , or how 
 't wa , he did so set hi teeth and tear it . o , i warrant , how he 
 mammock 'd it ! 
 volumnia . one on 's father 's mood . 
 valeria . inde , la , 't is a nobl child . 
 virgilia . a crack , madam . 
 valeria . come , lay asid your stitcheri ; i must have you play the 
 idl huswif with me thi afternoon . 
 virgilia . no , good madam ; i will not out of door . 
 valeria . not out of door ! 
 volumnia . she shall , she shall . 
 virgilia . inde , no , by your patienc ; i 'll not over the threshold 
 till my lord return from the war . 
 valeria . fie , you confin yourself most unreason ; come , you 
 must go visit the good ladi that lie in . 
 virgilia . i will wish her speedi strength , and visit her with my 
 prayer ; but i can not go thither . 
 volumnia . whi , i pray you ? 
 virgilia . 't is not to save labour , nor that i want love . 
 valeria . you would be anoth penelop ; yet they say all the yarn 
 she spun in ulyss ' absenc did but fill ithaca full of moth . 
 come , i would your cambric were sensibl as your finger , that you 
 might leav prick it for piti . come , you shall go with us . 
 virgilia . no , good madam , pardon me ; inde i will not forth . 
 valeria . in truth , la , go with me ; and i 'll tell you excel news 
 of your husband . 
 virgilia . o , good madam , there can be none yet . 
 valeria . verili , i do not jest with you ; there came news from him 
 last night . 
 virgilia . inde , madam ? 
 valeria . in earnest , it 's true ; i heard a senat speak it . thu it 
 is : the volsc have an armi forth ; against whom cominiu the 
 gener is gone , with one part of our roman power . your lord and 
 titu lartiu are set down befor their citi corioli ; they 
 noth doubt prevail and to make it brief war . thi is true , 
 on mine honour ; and so , i pray , go with us . 
 virgilia . give me excus , good madam ; i will obey you in everyth 
 hereaft . 
 volumnia . let her alon , ladi ; as she is now , she will but diseas 
 our better mirth . 
 valeria . in troth , i think she would . fare you well , then . come , 
 good sweet ladi . prithe , virgilia , turn thi solem out o ' 
 door and go along with us . 
 virgilia . no , at a word , madam ; inde i must not . i wish you much 
 mirth . 
 valeria . well then , farewel . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 befor corioli 
 
 enter marciu , titu lartiu , with drum and colour , 
 with captain and soldier . to them a messeng 
 
 marciu . yonder come news ; a wager- they have met . 
 lartiu . my hors to yours- no . 
 marciu . 't is done . 
 lartiu . agre . 
 marciu . say , ha our gener met the enemi ? 
 messeng . they lie in view , but have not spoke as yet . 
 lartiu . so , the good hors is mine . 
 marciu . i 'll buy him of you . 
 lartiu . no , i 'll nor sell nor give him ; lend you him i will 
 for half a hundr year . summon the town . 
 marciu . how far off lie these armi ? 
 messeng . within thi mile and half . 
 marciu . then shall we hear their 'larum , and they our . 
 now , mar , i prithe , make us quick in work , 
 that we with smoke sword may march from henc 
 to help our field friend ! come , blow thi blast . 
 
 they sound a parley . enter two senat with other , 
 on the wall of corioli 
 
 tullu aufidiu , is he within your wall ? 
 first senat . no , nor a man that fear you less than he : 
 that 's lesser than a littl . [ drum afar off ] hark , our drum 
 are bring forth our youth . we 'll break our wall 
 rather than they shall pound us up ; our gate , 
 which yet seem shut , we have but pinn 'd with rush ; 
 they 'll open of themselv . [ alarum far off ] hark you far off ! 
 there is aufidiu . list what work he make 
 amongst your cloven armi . 
 marciu . o , they are at it ! 
 lartiu . their nois be our instruct . ladder , ho ! 
 
 enter the armi of the volsc 
 
 marciu . they fear us not , but issu forth their citi . 
 now put your shield befor your heart , and fight 
 with heart more proof than shield . advanc , brave titu . 
 they do disdain us much beyond our thought , 
 which make me sweat with wrath . come on , my fellow . 
 he that retir , i 'll take him for a volsc , 
 and he shall feel mine edg . 
 
 alarum . the roman are beat back to their trench . 
 re-ent marciu , curs 
 
 marciu . all the contagion of the south light on you , 
 you shame of rome ! you herd of- boil and plagu 
 plaster you o'er , that you may be abhorr 'd 
 farther than seen , and one infect anoth 
 against the wind a mile ! you soul of gees 
 that bear the shape of men , how have you run 
 from slave that ape would beat ! pluto and hell ! 
 all hurt behind ! back red , and face pale 
 with flight and agu fear ! mend and charg home , 
 or , by the fire of heaven , i 'll leav the foe 
 and make my war on you . look to't . come on ; 
 if you 'll stand fast we 'll beat them to their wive , 
 as they us to our trench . follow me . 
 
 anoth alarum . the volsc fli , and marciu follow 
 them to the gate 
 
 so , now the gate are ope ; now prove good second ; 
 't is for the follow fortun widen them , 
 not for the flier . mark me , and do the like . 
 
 [ marciu enter the gate ] 
 
 first soldier . fool-hardi ; not i . 
 second soldier . not i . [ marciu is shut in ] 
 first soldier . see , they have shut him in . 
 all . to th ' pot , i warrant him . [ alarum continu ] 
 
 re-ent titu lartiu 
 
 lartiu . what is becom of marciu ? 
 all . slain , sir , doubtless . 
 first soldier . follow the flier at the veri heel , 
 with them he enter ; who , upon the sudden , 
 clapp 'd to their gate . he is himself alon , 
 to answer all the citi . 
 lartiu . o nobl fellow ! 
 who sensibl outdar hi senseless sword , 
 and when it bow stand'st up . thou art left , marciu ; 
 a carbuncl entir , as big as thou art , 
 were not so rich a jewel . thou wast a soldier 
 even to cato 's wish , not fierc and terribl 
 onli in stroke ; but with thi grim look and 
 the thunder-lik percuss of thi sound 
 thou mad'st thine enemi shake , as if the world 
 were fever and did trembl . 
 
 re-ent marciu , bleed , assault by the enemi 
 
 first soldier . look , sir . 
 lartiu . o , 't is marciu ! 
 let 's fetch him off , or make remain alik . 
 [ they fight , and all enter the citi ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 within corioli . a street 
 
 enter certain roman , with spoil 
 
 first roman . thi will i carri to rome . 
 second roman . and i thi . 
 third roman . a murrain on 't ! i took thi for silver . 
 [ alarum continu still afar off ] 
 
 enter marciu and titu lartiu with a trumpet 
 
 marciu . see here these mover that do prize their hour 
 at a crack 'd drachma ! cushion , leaden spoon , 
 iron of a doit , doublet that hangmen would 
 buri with those that wore them , these base slave , 
 ere yet the fight be done , pack up . down with them ! 
 exeunt pillag 
 and hark , what nois the gener make ! to him ! 
 there is the man of my soul 's hate , aufidiu , 
 pierc our roman ; then , valiant titu , take 
 conveni number to make good the citi ; 
 whilst i , with those that have the spirit , will hast 
 to help cominiu . 
 lartiu . worthi sir , thou bleed'st ; 
 thi exercis hath been too violent 
 for a second cours of fight . 
 marciu . sir , prais me not ; 
 my work hath yet not warm 'd me . fare you well ; 
 the blood i drop is rather physic 
 than danger to me . to aufidiu thu 
 i will appear , and fight . 
 lartiu . now the fair goddess , fortun , 
 fall deep in love with thee , and her great charm 
 misguid thi oppos ' sword ! bold gentleman , 
 prosper be thi page ! 
 marciu . thi friend no less 
 than those she placeth highest ! so farewel . 
 lartiu . thou worthiest marciu ! exit marciu 
 go sound thi trumpet in the market-plac ; 
 call thither all the offic o ' th ' town , 
 where they shall know our mind . away ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 near the camp of cominiu 
 
 enter cominiu , as it were in retir , with soldier 
 
 cominiu . breath you , my friend . well fought ; we are come off 
 like roman , neither foolish in our stand 
 nor cowardli in retir . believ me , sir , 
 we shall be charg 'd again . while we have struck , 
 by interim and convey gust we have heard 
 the charg of our friend . the roman god , 
 lead their success as we wish our own , 
 that both our power , with smile front encount'r , 
 may give you thank sacrific ! 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 thi news ? 
 messeng . the citizen of corioli have issu 
 and given to lartiu and to marciu battl ; 
 i saw our parti to their trench driven , 
 and then i came away . 
 cominiu . though thou speak'st truth , 
 methink thou speak'st not well . how long is't sinc ? 
 messeng . abov an hour , my lord . 
 cominiu . 't is not a mile ; briefli we heard their drum . 
 how couldst thou in a mile confound an hour , 
 and bring thi news so late ? 
 messeng . spi of the volsc 
 held me in chase , that i wa forc 'd to wheel 
 three or four mile about ; els had i , sir , 
 half an hour sinc brought my report . 
 
 enter marciu 
 
 cominiu . who 's yonder 
 that doe appear as he were flay 'd ? o god ! 
 he ha the stamp of marciu , and i have 
 before-tim seen him thu . 
 marciu . come i too late ? 
 cominiu . the shepherd know not thunder from a tabor 
 more than i know the sound of marciu ' tongu 
 from everi meaner man . 
 marciu . come i too late ? 
 cominiu . ay , if you come not in the blood of other , 
 but mantl in your own . 
 marciu . o ! let me clip ye 
 in arm as sound as when i woo 'd , in heart 
 as merri as when our nuptial day wa done , 
 and taper burn 'd to bedward . 
 cominiu . flower of warrior , 
 how is't with titu lartiu ? 
 marciu . as with a man busi about decre : 
 condemn some to death and some to exil ; 
 ransom him or piti , threat'n th ' other ; 
 hold corioli in the name of rome 
 even like a fawn greyhound in the leash , 
 to let him slip at will . 
 cominiu . where is that slave 
 which told me they had beat you to your trench ? 
 where is he ? call him hither . 
 marciu . let him alon ; 
 he did inform the truth . but for our gentlemen , 
 the common file- a plagu ! tribun for them ! 
 the mous ne'er shunn 'd the cat as they did budg 
 from rascal wors than they . 
 cominiu . but how prevail 'd you ? 
 marciu . will the time serv to tell ? i do not think . 
 where is the enemi ? are you lord o ' th ' field ? 
 if not , whi ceas you till you are so ? 
 cominiu . marciu , 
 we have at disadvantag fought , and did 
 retir to win our purpos . 
 marciu . how lie their battl ? know you on which side 
 they have plac 'd their men of trust ? 
 cominiu . as i guess , marciu , 
 their band i ' th ' vaward are the antiat , 
 of their best trust ; o'er them aufidiu , 
 their veri heart of hope . 
 marciu . i do beseech you , 
 by all the battl wherein we have fought , 
 by th ' blood we have shed togeth , by th ' vow 
 we have made to endur friend , that you directli 
 set me against aufidiu and hi antiat ; 
 and that you not delay the present , but , 
 fill the air with sword advanc 'd and dart , 
 we prove thi veri hour . 
 cominiu . though i could wish 
 you were conduct to a gentl bath 
 and balm appli to you , yet dare i never 
 deni your ask : take your choic of those 
 that best can aid your action . 
 marciu . those are they 
 that most are will . if ani such be here- 
 as it were sin to doubt- that love thi paint 
 wherein you see me smear 'd ; if ani fear 
 lesser hi person than an ill report ; 
 if ani think brave death outweigh bad life 
 and that hi countri 's dearer than himself ; 
 let him alon , or so mani so mind , 
 wave thu to express hi disposit , 
 and follow marciu . [ they all shout and wave their 
 sword , take him up in their arm and cast up their cap ] 
 o , me alon ! make you a sword of me ? 
 if these show be not outward , which of you 
 but is four volsc ? none of you but is 
 abl to bear against the great aufidiu 
 a shield as hard as hi . a certain number , 
 though thank to all , must i select from all ; the rest 
 shall bear the busi in some other fight , 
 as caus will be obey 'd . pleas you to march ; 
 and four shall quickli draw out my command , 
 which men are best inclin 'd . 
 cominiu . march on , my fellow ; 
 make good thi ostent , and you shall 
 divid in all with us . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 the gate of corioli 
 
 titu lartiu , have set a guard upon corioli , go with drum and trumpet 
 toward cominiu and caiu marciu , enter with a lieuten , other soldier , 
 and a scout 
 
 lartiu . so , let the port be guard ; keep your duti 
 as i have set them down . if i do send , dispatch 
 those centuri to our aid ; the rest will serv 
 for a short hold . if we lose the field 
 we can not keep the town . 
 lieuten . fear not our care , sir . 
 lartiu . henc , and shut your gate upon 's . 
 our guider , come ; to th ' roman camp conduct us . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene viii . 
 a field of battl between the roman and the volscian camp 
 
 alarum , as in battl . enter marciu and aufidiu at sever door 
 
 marciu . i 'll fight with none but thee , for i do hate thee 
 wors than a promise-break . 
 aufidiu . we hate alik : 
 not afric own a serpent i abhor 
 more than thi fame and envi . fix thi foot . 
 marciu . let the first budger die the other 's slave , 
 and the god doom him after ! 
 aufidiu . if i fli , marciu , 
 halloa me like a hare . 
 marciu . within these three hour , tullu , 
 alon i fought in your corioli wall , 
 and made what work i plea 'd . 't is not my blood 
 wherein thou seest me mask 'd . for thi reveng 
 wrench up thi power to th ' highest . 
 aufidiu . wert thou the hector 
 that wa the whip of your bragg 'd progeni , 
 thou shouldst not scape me here . 
 
 here they fight , and certain volsc come in the aid 
 of aufidiu . marciu fight till they be driven in 
 breathless 
 
 offici , and not valiant , you have sham 'd me 
 in your condemn second . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ix . 
 the roman camp 
 
 flourish . alarum . a retreat is sound . enter , at one door , 
 cominiu with the roman ; at anoth door , marciu , with hi arm in a scarf 
 
 cominiu . if i should tell thee o'er thi thi day 's work , 
 thou't not believ thi deed ; but i 'll report it 
 where senat shall mingl tear with smile ; 
 where great patrician shall attend , and shrug , 
 i ' th ' end admir ; where ladi shall be fright 
 and , gladli quak 'd , hear more ; where the dull tribun , 
 that with the fusti plebeian hate thine honour , 
 shall say against their heart 'we thank the god 
 our rome hath such a soldier . ' 
 yet cam'st thou to a morsel of thi feast , 
 have fulli din 'd befor . 
 
 enter titu lartiu , with hi power , from the pursuit 
 
 lartiu . o gener , 
 here is the steed , we the caparison . 
 hadst thou beheld- 
 marciu . pray now , no more ; my mother , 
 who ha a charter to extol her blood , 
 when she doe prais me griev me . i have done 
 as you have done- that 's what i can ; induc 'd 
 as you have been- that 's for my countri . 
 he that ha but effect hi good will 
 hath overta'en mine act . 
 cominiu . you shall not be 
 the grave of your deserv ; rome must know 
 the valu of her own . 'twere a conceal 
 wors than a theft , no less than a traduc , 
 to hide your do and to silenc that 
 which , to the spire and top of prais vouch 'd , 
 would seem but modest . therefor , i beseech you , 
 in sign of what you are , not to reward 
 what you have done , befor our armi hear me . 
 marciu . i have some wound upon me , and they smart 
 to hear themselv rememb'r . 
 cominiu . should they not , 
 well might they fester 'gainst ingratitud 
 and tent themselv with death . of all the horses- 
 whereof we have ta'en good , and good store- of all 
 the treasur in thi field achiev 'd and citi , 
 we render you the tenth ; to be ta'en forth 
 befor the common distribut at 
 your onli choic . 
 marciu . i thank you , gener , 
 but can not make my heart consent to take 
 a bribe to pay my sword . i do refus it , 
 and stand upon my common part with those 
 that have beheld the do . 
 
 a long flourish . they all cri 'marciu , marciu ! ' 
 cast up their cap and lanc . cominiu and lartiu stand bare 
 
 may these same instrument which you profan 
 never sound more ! when drum and trumpet shall 
 i ' th ' field prove flatter , let court and citi be 
 made all of false-fac 'd sooth . when steel grow 
 soft as the parasit 's silk , let him be made 
 an overtur for th ' war . no more , i say . 
 for that i have not wash 'd my nose that bled , 
 or foil 'd some debil wretch , which without note 
 here 's mani els have done , you shout me forth 
 in acclam hyperbol , 
 as if i lov 'd my littl should be diet 
 in prais sauc 'd with lie . 
 cominiu . too modest are you ; 
 more cruel to your good report than grate 
 to us that give you truli . by your patienc , 
 if 'gainst yourself you be incen 'd , we 'll put you- 
 like one that mean hi proper harm- in manacl , 
 then reason safe with you . therefor be it known , 
 as to us , to all the world , that caiu marciu 
 wear thi war 's garland ; in token of the which , 
 my nobl steed , known to the camp , i give him , 
 with all hi trim belong ; and from thi time , 
 for what he did befor corioli , can him 
 with all th ' applause-and clamour of the host , 
 caiu marciu coriolanu . 
 bear th ' addit nobli ever ! 
 [ flourish . trumpet sound , and drum ] 
 all . caiu marciu coriolanu ! 
 coriolanu . i will go wash ; 
 and when my face is fair you shall perceiv 
 whether i blush or no . howbeit , i thank you ; 
 i mean to stride your steed , and at all time 
 to undercrest your good addit 
 to th ' fair of my power . 
 cominiu . so , to our tent ; 
 where , ere we do repos us , we will write 
 to rome of our success . you , titu lartiu , 
 must to corioli back . send us to rome 
 the best , with whom we may articul 
 for their own good and our . 
 lartiu . i shall , my lord . 
 coriolanu . the god begin to mock me . i , that now 
 refu 'd most princ gift , am bound to beg 
 of my lord gener . 
 cominiu . take't- 't is your ; what is't ? 
 coriolanu . i sometim lay here in corioli 
 at a poor man 's hous ; he us 'd me kindli . 
 he cri to me ; i saw him prison ; 
 but then aufidiu wa within my view , 
 and wrath o'erwhelm 'd my piti . i request you 
 to give my poor host freedom . 
 cominiu . o , well begg 'd ! 
 were he the butcher of my son , he should 
 be free as is the wind . deliv him , titu . 
 lartiu . marciu , hi name ? 
 coriolanu . by jupit , forgot ! 
 i am weari ; yea , my memori is tir 'd . 
 have we no wine here ? 
 cominiu . go we to our tent . 
 the blood upon your visag dri ; 't is time 
 it should be look 'd to . come . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene x . 
 the camp of the volsc 
 
 a flourish . cornet . enter tullu aufidiu bloodi , with two or three soldier 
 
 aufidiu . the town is ta'en . 
 first soldier . 'twill be deliv 'd back on good condit . 
 aufidiu . condit ! 
 i would i were a roman ; for i can not , 
 be a volsc , be that i am . condit ? 
 what good condit can a treati find 
 i ' th ' part that is at merci ? five time , marciu , 
 i have fought with thee ; so often hast thou beat me ; 
 and wouldst do so , i think , should we encount 
 as often as we eat . by th ' element , 
 if e'er again i meet him beard to beard , 
 he 's mine or i am hi . mine emul 
 hath not that honour i n't it had ; for where 
 i thought to crush him in an equal forc , 
 true sword to sword , i 'll potch at him some way , 
 or wrath or craft may get him . 
 first soldier . he 's the devil . 
 aufidiu . bolder , though not so subtl . my valour 's poison 'd 
 with onli suff'r stain by him ; for him 
 shall fli out of itself . nor sleep nor sanctuari , 
 be nake , sick , nor fane nor capitol , 
 the prayer of priest nor time of sacrific , 
 embarqu all of furi , shall lift up 
 their rotten privileg and custom 'gainst 
 my hate to marciu . where i find him , were it 
 at home , upon my brother 's guard , even there , 
 against the hospit canon , would i 
 wash my fierc hand in 's heart . go you to th ' citi ; 
 learn how 't is held , and what they are that must 
 be hostag for rome . 
 first soldier . will not you go ? 
 aufidiu . i am attend at the cypress grove ; i pray you- 
 't is south the citi mills- bring me word thither 
 how the world goe , that to the pace of it 
 i may spur on my journey . 
 first soldier . i shall , sir . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 rome . a public place 
 
 enter meneniu , with the two tribun of the peopl , siciniu and brutu 
 
 meneniu . the augur tell me we shall have news tonight . 
 brutu . good or bad ? 
 meneniu . not accord to the prayer of the peopl , for they love 
 not marciu . 
 siciniu . natur teach beast to know their friend . 
 meneniu . pray you , who doe the wolf love ? 
 siciniu . the lamb . 
 meneniu . ay , to devour him , as the hungri plebeian would the 
 nobl marciu . 
 brutu . he 's a lamb inde , that bae like a bear . 
 meneniu . he 's a bear inde , that live fike a lamb . you two are 
 old men ; tell me one thing that i shall ask you . 
 both tribun . well , sir . 
 meneniu . in what enorm is marciu poor in that you two have not 
 in abund ? 
 brutu . he 's poor in no one fault , but stor 'd with all . 
 siciniu . especi in pride . 
 brutu . and top all other in boast . 
 meneniu . thi is strang now . do you two know how you are censur 
 here in the city- i mean of us o ' th ' right-hand file ? do you ? 
 both tribun . whi , how are we censur 'd ? 
 meneniu . becaus you talk of pride now- will you not be angri ? 
 both tribun . well , well , sir , well . 
 meneniu . whi , 't is no great matter ; for a veri littl thief of 
 occas will rob you of a great deal of patienc . give your 
 disposit the rein , and be angri at your pleasures- at the 
 least , if you take it as a pleasur to you in be so . you blame 
 marciu for be proud ? 
 brutu . we do it not alon , sir . 
 meneniu . i know you can do veri littl alon ; for your help are 
 mani , or els your action would grow wondrou singl : your 
 abil are too infant-lik for do much alon . you talk of 
 pride . o that you could turn your eye toward the nape of your 
 neck , and make but an interior survey of your good selv ! o 
 that you could ! 
 both tribun . what then , sir ? 
 meneniu . whi , then you should discov a brace of unmerit , 
 proud , violent , testi magistrates-alia fools- as ani in rome . 
 siciniu . meneniu , you are known well enough too . 
 meneniu . i am known to be a humor patrician , and one that love 
 a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allay tiber i n't ; said to 
 be someth imperfect in favour the first complaint , hasti 
 and tinder-lik upon too trivial motion ; one that convers more 
 with the buttock of the night than with the forehead of the 
 morn . what i think i utter , and spend my malic in my breath . 
 meet two such wealsmen as you are- i can not call you 
 lycurguses- if the drink you give me touch my palat advers , i 
 make a crook face at it . i can not say your worship have 
 deliv 'd the matter well , when i find the ass in compound with 
 the major part of your syllabl ; and though i must be content to 
 bear with those that say you are reverend grave men , yet they lie 
 deadli that tell you you have good face . if you see thi in the 
 map of my microcosm , follow it that i am known well enough too ? 
 what harm can your bisson conspectu glean out of thi 
 charact , if i be known well enough too ? 
 brutu . come , sir , come , we know you well enough . 
 meneniu . you know neither me , yourselv , nor ani thing . you are 
 ambiti for poor knave ' cap and leg ; you wear out a good 
 wholesom forenoon in hear a caus between an orange-wif and 
 a fosset-sel , and then rejourn the controversi of threepenc 
 to a second day of audienc . when you are hear a matter 
 between parti and parti , if you chanc to be pinch 'd with the 
 colic , you make face like mummer , set up the bloodi flag 
 against all patienc , and , in roar for a chamber-pot , dismiss 
 the controversi bleed , the more entangl by your hear . all 
 the peac you make in their caus is call both the parti 
 knave . you are a pair of strang one . 
 brutu . come , come , you are well understood to be a perfect giber 
 for the tabl than a necessari bencher in the capitol . 
 meneniu . our veri priest must becom mocker , if they shall 
 encount such ridicul subject as you are . when you speak 
 best unto the purpos , it is not worth the wag of your 
 beard ; and your beard deserv not so honour a grave as to 
 stuff a botcher 's cushion or to be entomb 'd in an ass 's 
 pack-saddl . yet you must be say marciu is proud ; who , in a 
 cheap estim , is worth all your predecessor sinc deucalion ; 
 though peradventur some of the best of 'em were hereditari 
 hangmen . god-den to your worship . more of your convers 
 would infect my brain , be the herdsmen of the beastli 
 plebeian . i will be bold to take my leav of you . 
 [ brutu and siciniu go asid ] 
 
 enter volumnia , virgilia , and valeria 
 
 how now , my as fair as nobl ladies- and the moon , were she 
 earthli , no nobler- whither do you follow your eye so fast ? 
 volumnia . honour meneniu , my boy marciu approach ; for the 
 love of juno , let 's go . 
 meneniu . ha ! marciu come home ? 
 volumnia . ay , worthi meneniu , and with most prosper 
 approb . 
 meneniu . take my cap , jupit , and i thank thee . hoo ! 
 marciu come home ! 
 volumnia , virgilia . nay , 't is true . 
 volumnia . look , here 's a letter from him ; the state hath anoth , 
 hi wife anoth ; and i think there 's one at home for you . 
 meneniu . i will make my veri hous reel to-night . a letter for me ? 
 virgilia . ye , certain , there 's a letter for you ; i saw't . 
 meneniu . a letter for me ! it give me an estat of seven year ' 
 health ; in which time i will make a lip at the physician . the 
 most sovereign prescript in galen is but empiricut and , to 
 thi preserv , of no better report than a horse-drench . is he 
 not wound ? he wa wont to come home wound . 
 virgilia . o , no , no , no . 
 volumnia . o , he is wound , i thank the god for't . 
 meneniu . so do i too , if it be not too much . bring a victori in 
 hi pocket ? the wound becom him . 
 volumnia . on 's brow , meneniu , he come the third time home with 
 the oaken garland . 
 meneniu . ha he disciplin 'd aufidiu soundli ? 
 volumnia . titu lartiu write they fought togeth , but aufidiu 
 got off . 
 meneniu . and 't wa time for him too , i 'll warrant him that ; an he 
 had stay 'd by him , i would not have been so fidiu 'd for all the 
 chest in corioli and the gold that 's in them . is the senat 
 possess 'd of thi ? 
 volumnia . good ladi , let 's go . ye , ye , ye : the senat ha 
 letter from the gener , wherein he give my son the whole name 
 of the war ; he hath in thi action outdon hi former deed 
 doubli . 
 valeria . in troth , there 's wondrou thing spoke of him . 
 meneniu . wondrou ! ay , i warrant you , and not without hi true 
 purchas . 
 virgilia . the god grant them true ! 
 volumnia . true ! pow , waw . 
 meneniu . true ! i 'll be sworn they are true . where is he wound ? 
 [ to the tribun ] god save your good worship ! marciu is come 
 home ; he ha more caus to be proud . where is he wound ? 
 volumnia . i ' th ' shoulder and i ' th ' left arm ; there will be larg 
 cicatric to show the peopl when he shall stand for hi place . 
 he receiv in the repuls of tarquin seven hurt i ' th ' bodi . 
 meneniu . one i ' th ' neck and two i ' th ' thigh- there 's nine that i 
 know . 
 volumnia . he had befor thi last expedit twenty-f wound 
 upon him . 
 meneniu . now it 's twenty-seven ; everi gash wa an enemi 's grave . 
 [ a shout and flourish ] hark ! the trumpet . 
 volumnia . these are the usher of marciu . befor him he carri 
 nois , and behind him he leav tear ; 
 death , that dark spirit , in 's nervi arm doth lie , 
 which , be advanc 'd , declin , and then men die . 
 
 a sennet . trumpet sound . enter cominiu the 
 gener , and titu lartiu ; between them , 
 coriolanu , crown 'd with an oaken garland ; with 
 captain and soldier and a herald 
 
 herald . know , rome , that all alon marciu did fight 
 within corioli gate , where he hath won , 
 with fame , a name to caiu marciu ; these 
 in honour follow coriolanu . 
 welcom to rome , renown coriolanu ! [ flourish ] 
 all . welcom to rome , renown coriolanu ! 
 coriolanu . no more of thi , it doe offend my heart . 
 pray now , no more . 
 cominiu . look , sir , your mother ! 
 coriolanu . o , 
 you have , i know , petit 'd all the god 
 for my prosper ! [ kneel ] 
 volumnia . nay , my good soldier , up ; 
 my gentl marciu , worthi caiu , and 
 by deed-achiev honour newli nam'd- 
 what is it ? coriolanu must i can thee ? 
 but , o , thi wife ! 
 coriolanu . my graciou silenc , hail ! 
 wouldst thou have laugh 'd had i come coffin 'd home , 
 that weep'st to see me triumph ? ah , my dear , 
 such eye the widow in corioli wear , 
 and mother that lack son . 
 meneniu . now the god crown thee ! 
 coriolanu . and live you yet ? [ to valeria ] o my sweet ladi , 
 pardon . 
 volumnia . i know not where to turn . 
 o , welcom home ! and welcom , gener . 
 and y'are welcom all . 
 meneniu . a hundr thousand welcom . i could weep 
 and i could laugh ; i am light and heavi . welcom ! 
 a curs begin at veri root on 's heart 
 that is not glad to see thee ! you are three 
 that rome should dote on ; yet , by the faith of men , 
 we have some old crab tree here at home that will not 
 be graft to your relish . yet welcom , warrior . 
 we call a nettl but a nettl , and 
 the fault of fool but folli . 
 cominiu . ever right . 
 coriolanu . meneniu ever , ever . 
 herald . give way there , and go on . 
 coriolanu . [ to hi wife and mother ] your hand , and your . 
 ere in our own hous i do shade my head , 
 the good patrician must be visit ; 
 from whom i have receiv 'd not onli greet , 
 but with them chang of honour . 
 volumnia . i have live 
 to see inherit my veri wish , 
 and the build of my fanci ; onli 
 there 's one thing want , which i doubt not but 
 our rome will cast upon thee . 
 coriolanu . know , good mother , 
 i had rather be their servant in my way 
 than sway with them in their . 
 cominiu . on , to the capitol . 
 [ flourish . cornet . exeunt in state , as befor ] 
 
 brutu and siciniu come forward 
 
 brutu . all tongu speak of him and the blear sight 
 are spectacl to see him . your prattl nurs 
 into a raptur let her babi cri 
 while she chat him ; the kitchen malkin pin 
 her richest lockram 'bout her reechi neck , 
 clamb'r the wall to eye him ; stall , bulk , window , 
 are smother 'd up , lead fill 'd and ridg hor 'd 
 with variabl complexion , all agre 
 in earnest to see him . seld-shown flamen 
 do press among the popular throng and puff 
 to win a vulgar station ; our veil 'd dame 
 commit the war of white and damask in 
 their nice gawd cheek to th ' wanton spoil 
 of phoebu ' burn kiss . such a pother , 
 as if that whatsoev god who lead him 
 were slili crept into hi human power , 
 and gave him grace postur . 
 siciniu . on the sudden 
 i warrant him consul . 
 brutu . then our offic may 
 dure hi power go sleep . 
 siciniu . he can not temp'rat transport hi honour 
 from where he should begin and end , but will 
 lose those he hath won . 
 brutu . in that there 's comfort . 
 siciniu . doubt not 
 the common , for whom we stand , but they 
 upon their ancient malic will forget 
 with the least caus these hi new honour ; which 
 that he will give them make i as littl question 
 as he is proud to do't . 
 brutu . i heard him swear , 
 were he to stand for consul , never would he 
 appear i ' th ' market-plac , nor on him put 
 the napless vestur of humil ; 
 nor , show , as the manner is , hi wound 
 to th ' peopl , beg their stink breath . 
 siciniu . 't is right . 
 brutu . it wa hi word . o , he would miss it rather 
 than carri it but by the suit of the gentri to him 
 and the desir of the nobl . 
 siciniu . i wish no better 
 than have him hold that purpos , and to put it 
 in execut . 
 brutu . 't is most like he will . 
 siciniu . it shall be to him then as our good will : 
 a sure destruct . 
 brutu . so it must fall out 
 to him or our author . for an end , 
 we must suggest the peopl in what hatr 
 he still hath held them ; that to 's power he would 
 have made them mule , silenc 'd their pleader , and 
 disproperti their freedom ; hold them 
 in human action and capac 
 of no more soul nor fit for the world 
 than camel in their war , who have their provand 
 onli for bear burden , and sore blow 
 for sink under them . 
 siciniu . thi , as you say , suggest 
 at some time when hi soar insol 
 shall touch the people- which time shall not want , 
 if he be put upo n't , and that 's as easi 
 as to set dog on sheep- will be hi fire 
 to kindl their dri stubbl ; and their blaze 
 shall darken him for ever . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 brutu . what 's the matter ? 
 messeng . you are sent for to the capitol . 't is thought 
 that marciu shall be consul . 
 i have seen the dumb men throng to see him and 
 the blind to hear him speak ; matron flung glove , 
 ladi and maid their scarf and handkerch , 
 upon him as he pass 'd ; the nobl bend 
 as to jove 's statu , and the common made 
 a shower and thunder with their cap and shout . 
 i never saw the like . 
 brutu . let 's to the capitol , 
 and carri with us ear and eye for th ' time , 
 but heart for the event . 
 siciniu . have with you . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 rome . the capitol 
 
 enter two offic , to lay cushion , as it were in the capitol 
 
 first offic . come , come , they are almost here . how mani stand for 
 consulship ? 
 second offic . three , they say ; but 't is thought of everi one 
 coriolanu will carri it . 
 first offic . that 's a brave fellow ; but he 's vengeanc proud and 
 love not the common peopl . 
 second offic . faith , there have been mani great men that have 
 flatter 'd the peopl , who ne'er love them ; and there be mani 
 that they have love , they know not wherefor ; so that , if they 
 love they know not whi , they hate upon no better a ground . 
 therefor , for coriolanu neither to care whether they love or 
 hate him manifest the true knowledg he ha in their 
 disposit , and out of hi nobl careless let them plainli 
 see't . 
 first offic . if he did not care whether he had their love or no , 
 he wave indiffer 'twixt do them neither good nor harm ; 
 but he seek their hate with greater devot than they can 
 render it him , and leav noth undon that may fulli discov 
 him their opposit . now to seem to affect the malic and 
 displeasur of the peopl is as bad as that which he dislikes- to 
 flatter them for their love . 
 second offic . he hath deserv worthili of hi countri ; and hi 
 ascent is not by such easi degre as those who , have been 
 suppl and courteou to the peopl , bonnet , without ani further 
 deed to have them at all , into their estim and report ; but 
 he hath so plant hi honour in their eye and hi action in 
 their heart that for their tongu to be silent and not confess 
 so much were a kind of ingrat injuri ; to report otherwis 
 were a malic that , give itself the lie , would pluck reproof 
 and rebuk from everi car that heard it . 
 first offic . no more of him ; he 's a worthi man . make way , they 
 are come . 
 
 a sennet . enter the patrician and the tribun 
 of the peopl , lictor befor them ; coriolanu , 
 meneniu , cominiu the consul . siciniu and 
 brutu take their place by themselv . 
 coriolanu stand 
 
 meneniu . have determin 'd of the volsc , and 
 to send for titu lartiu , it remain , 
 as the main point of thi our after-meet , 
 to gratifi hi nobl servic that 
 hath thu stood for hi countri . therefor pleas you , 
 most reverend and grave elder , to desir 
 the present consul and last gener 
 in our well-found success to report 
 a littl of that worthi work perform 'd 
 by caiu marciu coriolanu ; whom 
 we met here both to thank and to rememb 
 with honour like himself . [ coriolanu sit ] 
 first senat . speak , good cominiu . 
 leav noth out for length , and make us think 
 rather our state 's defect for requit 
 than we to stretch it out . master o ' th ' peopl , 
 we do request your kindest ear ; and , after , 
 your love motion toward the common bodi , 
 to yield what pass here . 
 siciniu . we are convent 
 upon a pleas treati , and have heart 
 inclin to honour and advanc 
 the theme of our assembl . 
 brutu . which the rather 
 we shall be bless 'd to do , if he rememb 
 a kinder valu of the peopl than 
 he hath hereto priz 'd them at . 
 meneniu . that 's off , that 's off ; 
 i would you rather had been silent . pleas you 
 to hear cominiu speak ? 
 brutu . most willingli . 
 but yet my caution wa more pertin 
 than the rebuk you give it . 
 meneniu . he love your peopl ; 
 but tie him not to be their bedfellow . 
 worthi cominiu , speak . 
 [ coriolanu rise , and offer to go away ] 
 nay , keep your place . 
 first senat . sit , coriolanu , never shame to hear 
 what you have nobli done . 
 coriolanu . your honour ' pardon . 
 i had rather have my wound to heal again 
 than hear say how i got them . 
 brutu . sir , i hope 
 my word disbench 'd you not . 
 coriolanu . no , sir ; yet oft , 
 when blow have made me stay , i fled from word . 
 you sooth 'd not , therefor hurt not . but your peopl , 
 i love them as they weigh- 
 meneniu . pray now , sit down . 
 coriolanu . i had rather have one scratch my head i ' th ' sun 
 when the alarum were struck than idli sit 
 to hear my noth monster 'd . exit 
 meneniu . master of the peopl , 
 your multipli spawn how can he flatter- 
 that 's thousand to one good one- when you now see 
 he had rather ventur all hi limb for honour 
 than one on 's ear to hear it ? proceed , cominiu . 
 cominiu . i shall lack voic ; the deed of coriolanu 
 should not be utter 'd feebli . it is held 
 that valour is the chiefest virtu and 
 most dignifi the haver . if it be , 
 the man i speak of can not in the world 
 be singli counterpoi 'd . at sixteen year , 
 when tarquin made a head for rome , he fought 
 beyond the mark of other ; our then dictat , 
 whom with all prais i point at , saw him fight 
 when with hi amazonian chin he drove 
 the bristl lip befor him ; he bestrid 
 an o'erpress 'd roman and i ' th ' consul 's view 
 slew three oppos ; tarquin 's self he met , 
 and struck him on hi knee . in that day 's feat , 
 when he might act the woman in the scene , 
 he prov 'd best man i ' th ' field , and for hi meed 
 wa brow-bound with the oak . hi pupil age 
 man-ent'r thu , he wax like a sea , 
 and in the brunt of seventeen battl sinc 
 he lurch 'd all sword of the garland . for thi last , 
 befor and in corioli , let me say 
 i can not speak him home . he stopp 'd the flier , 
 and by hi rare exampl made the coward 
 turn terror into sport ; as weed befor 
 a vessel under sail , so men obey 'd 
 and fell below hi stem . hi sword , death 's stamp , 
 where it did mark , it took ; from face to foot 
 he wa a thing of blood , whose everi motion 
 wa tim 'd with die cri . alon he ent'r 
 the mortal gate of th ' citi , which he paint 
 with shunless destini ; aidless came off , 
 and with a sudden re-enforc struck 
 corioli like a planet . now all 's hi . 
 when by and by the din of war 'gan pierc 
 hi readi sens , then straight hi doubl spirit 
 re-quick'n what in flesh wa fatig , 
 and to the battl came he ; where he did 
 run reek o'er the live of men , as if 
 'twere a perpetu spoil ; and till we call 'd 
 both field and citi our he never stood 
 to eas hi breast with pant . 
 meneniu . worthi man ! 
 first senat . he can not but with measur fit the honour 
 which we devis him . 
 cominiu . our spoil he kick 'd at , 
 and look 'd upon thing preciou as they were 
 the common muck of the world . he covet less 
 than miseri itself would give , reward 
 hi deed with do them , and is content 
 to spend the time to end it . 
 meneniu . he 's right nobl ; 
 let him be call 'd for . 
 first senat . call coriolanu . 
 offic . he doth appear . 
 
 re-ent coriolanu 
 
 meneniu . the senat , coriolanu , are well plea 'd 
 to make thee consul . 
 coriolanu . i do owe them still 
 my life and servic . 
 meneniu . it then remain 
 that you do speak to the peopl . 
 coriolanu . i do beseech you 
 let me o'erleap that custom ; for i can not 
 put on the gown , stand nake , and entreat them 
 for my wound ' sake to give their suffrag . pleas you 
 that i may pass thi do . 
 siciniu . sir , the peopl 
 must have their voic ; neither will they bate 
 one jot of ceremoni . 
 meneniu . put them not to't . 
 pray you go fit you to the custom , and 
 take to you , as your predecessor have , 
 your honour with your form . 
 coriolanu . it is a part 
 that i shall blush in act , and might well 
 be taken from the peopl . 
 brutu . mark you that ? 
 coriolanu . to brag unto them 'thu i did , and thu ! ' 
 show them th ' unach scar which i should hide , 
 as if i had receiv 'd them for the hire 
 of their breath onli ! 
 meneniu . do not stand upo n't . 
 we recommend to you , tribun of the peopl , 
 our purpos to them ; and to our nobl consul 
 wish we all joy and honour . 
 senat . to coriolanu come all joy and honour ! 
 [ flourish . cornet . then exeunt all 
 but siciniu and brutu ] 
 brutu . you see how he intend to use the peopl . 
 siciniu . may they perceiv 's intent ! he will requir them 
 as if he did contemn what he request 
 should be in them to give . 
 brutu . come , we 'll inform them 
 of our proceed here . on th ' market-plac 
 i know they do attend us . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 rome . the forum 
 
 enter seven or eight citizen 
 
 first citizen . onc , if he do requir our voic , we ought not to 
 deni him . 
 second citizen . we may , sir , if we will . 
 third citizen . we have power in ourselv to do it , but it is a 
 power that we have no power to do ; for if he show us hi wound 
 and tell us hi deed , we are to put our tongu into those 
 wound and speak for them ; so , if he tell us hi nobl deed , we 
 must also tell him our nobl accept of them . ingratitud is 
 monstrou , and for the multitud to be ingrat were to make a 
 monster of the multitud ; of the which we be member should 
 bring ourselv to be monstrou member . 
 first citizen . and to make us no better thought of , a littl help 
 will serv ; for onc we stood up about the corn , he himself stuck 
 not to call us the many-head multitud . 
 third citizen . we have been call 'd so of mani ; not that our head 
 are some brown , some black , some abram , some bald , but that our 
 wit are so divers colour 'd ; and truli i think if all our wit 
 were to issu out of one skull , they would fli east , west , north , 
 south , and their consent of one direct way should be at onc to 
 all the point o ' th ' compass . 
 second citizen . think you so ? which way do you judg my wit would 
 fli ? 
 third citizen . nay , your wit will not so soon out as anoth man 's 
 will- 't is strongli wedg 'd up in a block-head ; but if it were at 
 liberti 'twould sure southward . 
 second citizen . whi that way ? 
 third citizen . to lose itself in a fog ; where be three part 
 melt away with rotten dew , the fourth would return for 
 conscienc ' sake , to help to get thee a wife . 
 second citizen . you are never without your trick ; you may , you 
 may . 
 third citizen . are you all resolv 'd to give your voic ? but that 's 
 no matter , the greater part carri it . i say , if he would 
 inclin to the peopl , there wa never a worthier man . 
 
 enter coriolanu , in a gown of humil , 
 with meneniu 
 
 here he come , and in the gown of humil . mark hi behaviour . 
 we are not to stay all togeth , but to come by him where he 
 stand , by one , by two , and by three . he 's to make hi 
 request by particular , wherein everi one of us ha a singl 
 honour , in give him our own voic with our own tongu ; 
 therefor follow me , and i 'll direct you how you shall go by him . 
 all . content , content . exeunt citizen 
 meneniu . o sir , you are not right ; have you not known 
 the worthiest men have done't ? 
 coriolanu . what must i say ? 
 ' i pray , sir'- plagu upo n't ! i can not bring 
 my tongu to such a pace . 'look , sir , my wound 
 i got them in my countri 's servic , when 
 some certain of your brethren roar 'd and ran 
 from th ' nois of our own drum . ' 
 meneniu . o me , the god ! 
 you must not speak of that . you must desir them 
 to think upon you . 
 coriolanu . think upon me ? hang 'em ! 
 i would they would forget me , like the virtu 
 which our divin lose by 'em . 
 meneniu . you 'll mar all . 
 i 'll leav you . pray you speak to 'em , i pray you , 
 in wholesom manner . exit 
 
 re-ent three of the citizen 
 
 coriolanu . bid them wash their face 
 and keep their teeth clean . so , here come a brace . 
 you know the caus , sir , of my stand here . 
 third citizen . we do , sir ; tell us what hath brought you to't . 
 coriolanu . mine own desert . 
 second citizen . your own desert ? 
 coriolanu . ay , not mine own desir . 
 third citizen . how , not your own desir ? 
 coriolanu . no , sir , 't wa never my desir yet to troubl the poor 
 with beg . 
 third citizen . you must think , if we give you anyth , we hope to 
 gain by you . 
 coriolanu . well then , i pray , your price o ' th ' consulship ? 
 first citizen . the price is to ask it kindli . 
 coriolanu . kindli , sir , i pray let me ha't . i have wound to show 
 you , which shall be your in privat . your good voic , sir ; what 
 say you ? 
 second citizen . you shall ha ' it , worthi sir . 
 coriolanu . a match , sir . there 's in all two worthi voic begg 'd . 
 i have your alm . adieu . 
 third citizen . but thi is someth odd . 
 second citizen . an 'twere to give again- but 't is no matter . 
 exeunt the three citizen 
 
 re-ent two other citizen 
 
 coriolanu . pray you now , if it may stand with the tune of your 
 voic that i may be consul , i have here the customari gown . 
 fourth citizen . you have deserv nobli of your countri , and you 
 have not deserv nobli . 
 coriolanu . your enigma ? 
 fourth citizen . you have been a scourg to her enemi ; you have 
 been a rod to her friend . you have not inde love the common 
 peopl . 
 coriolanu . you should account me the more virtuou , that i have 
 not been common in my love . i will , sir , flatter my sworn 
 brother , the peopl , to earn a dearer estim of them ; 't is a 
 condit they account gentl ; and sinc the wisdom of their 
 choic is rather to have my hat than my heart , i will practis 
 the insinu nod and be off to them most counterfeitli . that 
 is , sir , i will counterfeit the bewitch of some popular man 
 and give it bounti to the desir . therefor , beseech you i 
 may be consul . 
 fifth citizen . we hope to find you our friend ; and therefor give 
 you our voic heartili . 
 fourth citizen . you have receiv mani wound for your countri . 
 coriolanu . i will not seal your knowledg with show them . i 
 will make much of your voic , and so troubl you no farther . 
 both citizen . the god give you joy , sir , heartili ! 
 exeunt citizen 
 coriolanu . most sweet voic ! 
 better it is to die , better to starv , 
 than crave the hire which first we do deserv . 
 whi in thi wolvish toge should i stand here 
 to beg of hob and dick that do appear 
 their needless vouch ? custom call me to't . 
 what custom will , in all thing should we do't , 
 the dust on antiqu time would lie unswept , 
 and mountain error be too highli heap 'd 
 for truth to o'erp . rather than fool it so , 
 let the high offic and the honour go 
 to one that would do thu . i am half through : 
 the one part suffer , the other will i do . 
 
 re-ent three citizen more 
 
 here come moe voic . 
 your voic . for your voic i have fought ; 
 watch 'd for your voic ; for your voic bear 
 of wound two dozen odd ; battl thrice six 
 i have seen and heard of ; for your voic have 
 done mani thing , some less , some more . your voic ? 
 inde , i would be consul . 
 sixth citizen . he ha done nobli , and can not go without ani honest 
 man 's voic . 
 seventh citizen . therefor let him be consul . the god give him 
 joy , and make him good friend to the peopl ! 
 all . amen , amen . god save thee , nobl consul ! 
 exeunt citizen 
 coriolanu . worthi voic ! 
 
 re-ent meneniu with brutu and siciniu 
 
 meneniu . you have stood your limit , and the tribun 
 endu you with the peopl 's voic . remain 
 that , in th ' offici mark invest , you 
 anon do meet the senat . 
 coriolanu . is thi done ? 
 siciniu . the custom of request you have discharg 'd . 
 the peopl do admit you , and are summon 'd 
 to meet anon , upon your approb . 
 coriolanu . where ? at the senat hous ? 
 siciniu . there , coriolanu . 
 coriolanu . may i chang these garment ? 
 siciniu . you may , sir . 
 coriolanu . that i 'll straight do , and , know myself again , 
 repair to th ' senat hous . 
 meneniu . i 'll keep you compani . will you along ? 
 brutu . we stay here for the peopl . 
 siciniu . fare you well . 
 exeunt coriolanu and meneniu 
 he ha it now ; and by hi look methink 
 't is warm at 's heart . 
 brutu . with a proud heart he wore 
 hi humbl weed . will you dismiss the peopl ? 
 
 re-ent citizen 
 
 siciniu . how now , my master ! have you chose thi man ? 
 first citizen . he ha our voic , sir . 
 brutu . we pray the god he may deserv your love . 
 second citizen . amen , sir . to my poor unworthi notic , 
 he mock 'd us when he begg 'd our voic . 
 third citizen . certainli ; 
 he flout us downright . 
 first citizen . no , 't is hi kind of speech- he did not mock us . 
 second citizen . not one amongst us , save yourself , but say 
 he us 'd us scorn . he should have show 'd us 
 hi mark of merit , wound receiv 'd for 's countri . 
 siciniu . whi , so he did , i am sure . 
 all . no , no ; no man saw 'em . 
 third citizen . he said he had wound which he could show in 
 privat , 
 and with hi hat , thu wave it in scorn , 
 ' i would be consul , ' say he ; 'age custom 
 but by your voic will not so permit me ; 
 your voic therefor . ' when we grant that , 
 here wa ' i thank you for your voic . thank you , 
 your most sweet voic . now you have left your voic , 
 i have no further with you . ' wa not thi mockeri ? 
 siciniu . whi either were you ignor to see't , 
 or , see it , of such childish friendli 
 to yield your voic ? 
 brutu . could you not have told him- 
 as you were lesson'd- when he had no power 
 but wa a petti servant to the state , 
 he wa your enemi ; ever spake against 
 your liberti and the charter that you bear 
 i ' th ' bodi of the weal ; and now , arriv 
 a place of potenc and sway o ' th ' state , 
 if he should still malignantli remain 
 fast foe to th ' plebeii , your voic might 
 be curs to yourselv ? you should have said 
 that as hi worthi deed did claim no less 
 than what he stood for , so hi graciou natur 
 would think upon you for your voic , and 
 translat hi malic toward you into love , 
 stand your friendli lord . 
 siciniu . thu to have said , 
 as you were fore-advi 'd , had touch 'd hi spirit 
 and tri hi inclin ; from him pluck 'd 
 either hi graciou promis , which you might , 
 as caus had call 'd you up , have held him to ; 
 or els it would have gall 'd hi surli natur , 
 which easili endur not articl 
 tie him to aught . so , put him to rage , 
 you should have ta'en th ' advantag of hi choler 
 and pass 'd him unelect . 
 brutu . did you perceiv 
 he did solicit you in free contempt 
 when he did need your love ; and do you think 
 that hi contempt shall not be bruis to you 
 when he hath power to crush ? whi , had your bodi 
 no heart among you ? or had you tongu to cri 
 against the rectorship of judgment ? 
 siciniu . have you 
 ere now deni the asker , and now again , 
 of him that did not ask but mock , bestow 
 your su'd-for tongu ? 
 third citizen . he 's not confirm 'd : we may deni him yet . 
 second citizen . and will deni him ; 
 i 'll have five hundr voic of that sound . 
 first citizen . i twice five hundr , and their friend to piec 
 'em . 
 brutu . get you henc instantli , and tell those friend 
 they have chose a consul that will from them take 
 their liberti , make them of no more voic 
 than dog , that are as often beat for bark 
 as therefor kept to do so . 
 siciniu . let them assembl ; 
 and , on a safer judgment , all revok 
 your ignor elect . enforc hi pride 
 and hi old hate unto you ; besid , forget not 
 with what contempt he wore the humbl weed ; 
 how in hi suit he scorn 'd you ; but your love , 
 think upon hi servic , took from you 
 th ' apprehens of hi present portanc , 
 which , most gibingli , ungrav , he did fashion 
 after the inveter hate he bear you . 
 brutu . lay 
 a fault on us , your tribun , that we labour 'd , 
 no impedi between , but that you must 
 cast your elect on him . 
 siciniu . say you chose him 
 more after our command than as guid 
 by your own true affect ; and that your mind , 
 pre-occupi with what you rather must do 
 than what you should , made you against the grain 
 to voic him consul . lay the fault on us . 
 brutu . ay , spare us not . say we read lectur to you , 
 how youngli he began to serv hi countri , 
 how long continu ; and what stock he spring of- 
 the nobl hous o ' th ' marcian ; from whenc came 
 that ancu marciu , numa 's daughter 's son , 
 who , after great hostiliu , here wa king ; 
 of the same hous publiu and quintu were , 
 that our best water brought by conduit hither ; 
 and censorinu , nobli name so , 
 twice be by the peopl chosen censor , 
 wa hi great ancestor . 
 siciniu . one thu descend , 
 that hath besid well in hi person wrought 
 to be set high in place , we did commend 
 to your remembr ; but you have found , 
 scale hi present bear with hi past , 
 that he 's your fix enemi , and revok 
 your sudden approb . 
 brutu . say you ne'er had done't- 
 harp on that still- but by our put on ; 
 and present , when you have drawn your number , 
 repair to th ' capitol . 
 citizen . will will so ; almost all 
 repent in their elect . exeunt plebeian 
 brutu . let them go on ; 
 thi mutini were better put in hazard 
 than stay , past doubt , for greater . 
 if , as hi natur is , he fall in rage 
 with their refus , both observ and answer 
 the vantag of hi anger . 
 siciniu . to th ' capitol , come . 
 we will be there befor the stream o ' th ' peopl ; 
 and thi shall seem , as partli 't is , their own , 
 which we have goad onward . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 rome . a street 
 
 cornet . enter coriolanu , meneniu , all the gentri , cominiu , 
 titu lartiu , and other senat 
 
 coriolanu . tullu aufidiu , then , had made new head ? 
 lartiu . he had , my lord ; and that it wa which cau 'd 
 our swifter composit . 
 coriolanu . so then the volsc stand but as at first , 
 readi , when time shall prompt them , to make road 
 upon 's again . 
 cominiu . they are worn , lord consul , so 
 that we shall hardli in our age see 
 their banner wave again . 
 coriolanu . saw you aufidiu ? 
 lartiu . on safeguard he came to me , and did curs 
 against the volsc , for they had so vile 
 yield the town . he is retir 'd to antium . 
 coriolanu . spoke he of me ? 
 lartiu . he did , my lord . 
 coriolanu . how ? what ? 
 lartiu . how often he had met you , sword to sword ; 
 that of all thing upon the earth he hate 
 your person most ; that he would pawn hi fortun 
 to hopeless restitut , so he might 
 be call 'd your vanquish . 
 coriolanu . at antium live he ? 
 lartiu . at antium . 
 coriolanu . i wish i had a caus to seek him there , 
 to oppos hi hatr fulli . welcom home . 
 
 enter siciniu and brutu 
 
 behold , these are the tribun of the peopl , 
 the tongu o ' th ' common mouth . i do despis them , 
 for they do prank them in author , 
 against all nobl suffer . 
 siciniu . pass no further . 
 coriolanu . ha ! what is that ? 
 brutu . it will be danger to go on- no further . 
 coriolanu . what make thi chang ? 
 meneniu . the matter ? 
 cominiu . hath he not pass 'd the nobl and the common ? 
 brutu . cominiu , no . 
 coriolanu . have i had children 's voic ? 
 first senat . tribun , give way : he shall to th ' market-plac . 
 brutu . the peopl are incen 'd against him . 
 siciniu . stop , 
 or all will fall in broil . 
 coriolanu . are these your herd ? 
 must these have voic , that can yield them now 
 and straight disclaim their tongu ? what are your offic ? 
 you be their mouth , whi rule you not their teeth ? 
 have you not set them on ? 
 meneniu . be calm , be calm . 
 coriolanu . it is a purpo 'd thing , and grow by plot , 
 to curb the will of the nobil ; 
 suffer't , and live with such as can not rule 
 nor ever will be rul 'd . 
 brutu . call't not a plot . 
 the peopl cri you mock 'd them ; and of late , 
 when corn wa given them grati , you repin 'd ; 
 scandal 'd the suppliant for the peopl , call 'd them 
 time-pleas , flatter , foe to nobl . 
 coriolanu . whi , thi wa known befor . 
 brutu . not to them all . 
 coriolanu . have you inform 'd them sithenc ? 
 brutu . how ? i inform them ! 
 cominiu . you are like to do such busi . 
 brutu . not unlik 
 each way to better your . 
 coriolanu . whi then should i be consul ? by yond cloud , 
 let me deserv so ill as you , and make me 
 your fellow tribun . 
 siciniu . you show too much of that 
 for which the peopl stir ; if you will pass 
 to where you are bound , you must enquir your way , 
 which you are out of , with a gentler spirit , 
 or never be so nobl as a consul , 
 nor yoke with him for tribun . 
 meneniu . let 's be calm . 
 cominiu . the peopl are abu 'd ; set on . thi palt'r 
 becom not rome ; nor ha coriolanu 
 deserv thi so dishonour 'd rub , laid fals 
 i ' th ' plain way of hi merit . 
 coriolanu . tell me of corn ! 
 thi wa my speech , and i will speak't again- 
 meneniu . not now , not now . 
 first senat . not in thi heat , sir , now . 
 coriolanu . now , as i live , i will . 
 my nobler friend , i crave their pardon . 
 for the mutabl , rank-scent meini , let them 
 regard me as i do not flatter , and 
 therein behold themselv . i say again , 
 in sooth them we nourish 'gainst our senat 
 the cockl of rebellion , insol , sedit , 
 which we ourselv have plough 'd for , sow 'd , and scatter 'd , 
 by mingl them with us , the honour 'd number , 
 who lack not virtu , no , nor power , but that 
 which they have given to beggar . 
 meneniu . well , no more . 
 first senat . no more word , we beseech you . 
 coriolanu . how ? no more ! 
 as for my countri i have shed my blood , 
 not fear outward forc , so shall my lung 
 coin word till their decay against those measl 
 which we disdain should tetter us , yet sought 
 the veri way to catch them . 
 brutu . you speak o ' th ' peopl 
 as if you were a god , to punish ; not 
 a man of their infirm . 
 siciniu . 'twere well 
 we let the peopl know't . 
 meneniu . what , what ? hi choler ? 
 coriolanu . choler ! 
 were i as patient as the midnight sleep , 
 by jove , 'twould be my mind ! 
 siciniu . it is a mind 
 that shall remain a poison where it is , 
 not poison ani further . 
 coriolanu . shall remain ! 
 hear you thi triton of the minnow ? mark you 
 hi absolut 'shall ' ? 
 cominiu . 't wa from the canon . 
 coriolanu . 'shall ' ! 
 o good but most unwis patrician ! whi , 
 you grave but reckless senat , have you thu 
 given hydra here to choos an offic 
 that with hi peremptori 'shall , ' be but 
 the horn and nois o ' th ' monster 's , want not spirit 
 to say he 'll turn your current in a ditch , 
 and make your channel hi ? if he have power , 
 then vail your ignor ; if none , awak 
 your danger leniti . if you are learn 'd , 
 be not as common fool ; if you are not , 
 let them have cushion by you . you are plebeian , 
 if they be senat ; and they are no less , 
 when , both your voic blend , the great'st tast 
 most palat their . they choos their magistr ; 
 and such a one as he , who put hi 'shall , ' 
 hi popular 'shall , ' against a graver bench 
 than ever frown 'd in greec . by jove himself , 
 it make the consul base ; and my soul ach 
 to know , when two author are up , 
 neither suprem , how soon confus 
 may enter 'twixt the gap of both and take 
 the one by th ' other . 
 cominiu . well , on to th ' market-plac . 
 coriolanu . whoever gave that counsel to give forth 
 the corn o ' th ' storehous grati , as 't wa us 'd 
 sometim in greece- 
 meneniu . well , well , no more of that . 
 coriolanu . though there the peopl had more absolut pow ' r- 
 i say they nourish 'd disobedi , fed 
 the ruin of the state . 
 brutu . whi shall the peopl give 
 one that speak thu their voic ? 
 coriolanu . i 'll give my reason , 
 more worthier than their voic . they know the corn 
 wa not our recompens , rest well assur 'd 
 they ne'er did servic for't ; be press 'd to th ' war 
 even when the navel of the state wa touch 'd , 
 they would not thread the gate . thi kind of servic 
 did not deserv corn grati . be i ' th ' war , 
 their mutini and revolt , wherein they show 'd 
 most valour , spoke not for them . th ' accus 
 which they have often made against the senat , 
 all caus unborn , could never be the nativ 
 of our so frank donat . well , what then ? 
 how shall thi bosom multipli digest 
 the senat 's courtesi ? let deed express 
 what 's like to be their word : 'we did request it ; 
 we are the greater poll , and in true fear 
 they gave us our demand . ' thu we debas 
 the natur of our seat , and make the rabbl 
 call our care fear ; which will in time 
 break ope the lock o ' th ' senat and bring in 
 the crow to peck the eagl . 
 meneniu . come , enough . 
 brutu . enough , with over measur . 
 coriolanu . no , take more . 
 what may be sworn by , both divin and human , 
 seal what i end withal ! thi doubl worship , 
 where one part doe disdain with caus , the other 
 insult without all reason ; where gentri , titl , wisdom , 
 can not conclud but by the yea and no 
 of gener ignorance- it must omit 
 real necess , and give way the while 
 to unstabl slight . purpos so barr 'd , it follow 
 noth is done to purpos . therefor , beseech you- 
 you that will be less fear than discreet ; 
 that love the fundament part of state 
 more than you doubt the chang o n't ; that prefer 
 a nobl life befor a long , and wish 
 to jump a bodi with a danger physic 
 that 's sure of death without it- at onc pluck out 
 the multitudin tongu ; let them not lick 
 the sweet which is their poison . your dishonour 
 mangl true judgment , and bereav the state 
 of that integr which should become't , 
 not have the power to do the good it would , 
 for th ' ill which doth control't . 
 brutu . ha said enough . 
 siciniu . ha spoken like a traitor and shall answer 
 as traitor do . 
 coriolanu . thou wretch , despit o'erwhelm thee ! 
 what should the peopl do with these bald tribun , 
 on whom depend , their obedi fail 
 to the greater bench ? in a rebellion , 
 when what 's not meet , but what must be , wa law , 
 then were they chosen ; in a better hour 
 let what is meet be said it must be meet , 
 and throw their power i ' th ' dust . 
 brutu . manifest treason ! 
 siciniu . thi a consul ? no . 
 brutu . the aedil , ho ! 
 
 enter an aedil 
 
 let him be apprehend . 
 siciniu . go call the peopl , [ exit aedil ] in whose name myself 
 attach thee as a traitor innov , 
 a foe to th ' public weal . obey , i charg thee , 
 and follow to thine answer . 
 coriolanu . henc , old goat ! 
 patrician . we 'll sureti him . 
 cominiu . ag 'd sir , hand off . 
 coriolanu . henc , rotten thing ! or i shall shake thi bone 
 out of thi garment . 
 siciniu . help , ye citizen ! 
 
 enter a rabbl of plebeian , with the aedil 
 
 meneniu . on both side more respect . 
 siciniu . here 's he that would take from you all your power . 
 brutu . seiz him , aedil . 
 plebeian . down with him ! down with him ! 
 second senat . weapon , weapon , weapon ! 
 [ they all bustl about coriolanu ] 
 all . tribun ! patrician ! citizen ! what , ho ! siciniu ! 
 brutu ! coriolanu ! citizen ! 
 patrician . peac , peac , peac ; stay , hold , peac ! 
 meneniu . what is about to be ? i am out of breath ; 
 confus 's near ; i can not speak . you tribun 
 to th ' people- coriolanu , patienc ! 
 speak , good siciniu . 
 siciniu . hear me , peopl ; peac ! 
 plebeian . let 's hear our tribun . peac ! speak , speak , speak . 
 siciniu . you are at point to lose your liberti . 
 marciu would have all from you ; marciu , 
 whom late you have nam 'd for consul . 
 meneniu . fie , fie , fie ! 
 thi is the way to kindl , not to quench . 
 first senat . to unbuild the citi , and to lay all flat . 
 siciniu . what is the citi but the peopl ? 
 plebeian . true , 
 the peopl are the citi . 
 brutu . by the consent of all we were establish 'd 
 the peopl 's magistr . 
 plebeian . you so remain . 
 meneniu . and so are like to do . 
 cominiu . that is the way to lay the citi flat , 
 to bring the roof to the foundat , 
 and buri all which yet distinctli rang 
 in heap and pile of ruin . 
 siciniu . thi deserv death . 
 brutu . or let us stand to our author 
 or let us lose it . we do here pronounc , 
 upon the part o ' th ' peopl , in whose power 
 we were elect their : marciu is worthi 
 of present death . 
 siciniu . therefor lay hold of him ; 
 bear him to th ' rock tarpeian , and from thenc 
 into destruct cast him . 
 brutu . aedil , seiz him . 
 plebeian . yield , marciu , yield . 
 meneniu . hear me one word ; beseech you , tribun , 
 hear me but a word . 
 aedil . peac , peac ! 
 meneniu . be that you seem , truli your countri 's friend , 
 and temp'rat proceed to what you would 
 thu violent redress . 
 brutu . sir , those cold way , 
 that seem like prudent help , are veri poison 
 where the diseas is violent . lay hand upon him 
 and bear him to the rock . 
 [ coriolanu draw hi sword ] 
 coriolanu . no : i 'll die here . 
 there 's some among you have beheld me fight ; 
 come , tri upon yourselv what you have seen me . 
 meneniu . down with that sword ! tribun , withdraw awhil . 
 brutu . lay hand upon him . 
 meneniu . help marciu , help , 
 you that be nobl ; help him , young and old . 
 plebeian . down with him , down with him ! 
 [ in thi mutini the tribun , the aedil , 
 and the peopl are beat in ] 
 meneniu . go , get you to your hous ; be gone , away . 
 all will be nought els . 
 second senat . get you gone . 
 coriolanu . stand fast ; 
 we have as mani friend as enemi . 
 meneniu . shall it be put to that ? 
 first senat . the god forbid ! 
 i prithe , nobl friend , home to thi hous ; 
 leav us to cure thi caus . 
 meneniu . for 't is a sore upon us 
 you can not tent yourself ; be gone , beseech you . 
 cominiu . come , sir , along with us . 
 coriolanu . i would they were barbarian , as they are , 
 though in rome litter 'd ; not roman , as they are not , 
 though calv i ' th ' porch o ' th ' capitol . 
 meneniu . be gone . 
 put not your worthi rage into your tongu ; 
 one time will owe anoth . 
 coriolanu . on fair ground 
 i could beat forti of them . 
 meneniu . i could myself 
 take up a brace o ' th ' best of them ; yea , the two tribun . 
 cominiu . but now 't is odd beyond arithmet , 
 and manhood is call 'd fooleri when it stand 
 against a fall fabric . will you henc , 
 befor the tag return ? whose rage doth rend 
 like interrupt water , and o'erbear 
 what they are us 'd to bear . 
 meneniu . pray you be gone . 
 i 'll tri whether my old wit be in request 
 with those that have but littl ; thi must be patch 'd 
 with cloth of ani colour . 
 cominiu . nay , come away . 
 exeunt coriolanu and cominiu , with other 
 patrician . thi man ha marr 'd hi fortun . 
 meneniu . hi natur is too nobl for the world : 
 he would not flatter neptun for hi trident , 
 or jove for 's power to thunder . hi heart 's hi mouth ; 
 what hi breast forg , that hi tongu must vent ; 
 and , be angri , doe forget that ever 
 he heard the name of death . [ a nois within ] 
 here 's goodli work ! 
 patrician . i would they were a-b . 
 meneniu . i would they were in tiber . 
 what the vengeanc , could he not speak 'em fair ? 
 
 re-ent brutu and siciniu , the rabbl again 
 
 siciniu . where is thi viper 
 that would depopul the citi and 
 be everi man himself ? 
 meneniu . you worthi tribunes- 
 siciniu . he shall be thrown down the tarpeian rock 
 with rigor hand ; he hath resist law , 
 and therefor law shall scorn him further trial 
 than the sever of the public power , 
 which he so set at nought . 
 first citizen . he shall well know 
 the nobl tribun are the peopl 's mouth , 
 and we their hand . 
 plebeian . he shall , sure o n't . 
 meneniu . sir , sir- 
 siciniu . peac ! 
 meneniu . do not cri havoc , where you should but hunt 
 with modest warrant . 
 siciniu . sir , how comes't that you 
 have holp to make thi rescu ? 
 meneniu . hear me speak . 
 as i do know the consul 's worthi , 
 so can i name hi fault . 
 siciniu . consul ! what consul ? 
 meneniu . the consul coriolanu . 
 brutu . he consul ! 
 plebeian . no , no , no , no , no . 
 meneniu . if , by the tribun ' leav , and your , good peopl , 
 i may be heard , i would crave a word or two ; 
 the which shall turn you to no further harm 
 than so much loss of time . 
 siciniu . speak briefli , then , 
 for we are peremptori to dispatch 
 thi viper traitor ; to eject him henc 
 were but one danger , and to keep him here 
 our certain death ; therefor it is decre 
 he die to-night . 
 meneniu . now the good god forbid 
 that our renown rome , whose gratitud 
 toward her deserv children is enrol 'd 
 in jove 's own book , like an unnatur dam 
 should now eat up her own ! 
 siciniu . he 's a diseas that must be cut away . 
 meneniu . o , he 's a limb that ha but a disease- 
 mortal , to cut it off : to cure it , easi . 
 what ha he done to rome that 's worthi death ? 
 kill our enemi , the blood he hath lost- 
 which i dare vouch is more than that he hath 
 by mani an ounce- he dropt it for hi countri ; 
 and what is left , to lose it by hi countri 
 were to us all that do't and suffer it 
 a brand to th ' end o ' th ' world . 
 siciniu . thi is clean kam . 
 brutu . mere awri . when he did love hi countri , 
 it honour 'd him . 
 siciniu . the servic of the foot , 
 be onc gangren 'd , is not then respect 
 for what befor it wa . 
 brutu . we 'll hear no more . 
 pursu him to hi hous and pluck him thenc , 
 lest hi infect , be of catch natur , 
 spread further . 
 meneniu . one word more , one word 
 thi tiger-foot rage , when it shall find 
 the harm of unscann 'd swift , will , too late , 
 tie leaden pound to 's heel . proceed by process , 
 lest parties- as he is belov'd- break out , 
 and sack great rome with roman . 
 brutu . if it were so- 
 siciniu . what do ye talk ? 
 have we not had a tast of hi obedience- 
 our aedil smote , ourselv resist ? come ! 
 meneniu . consid thi : he ha been bred i ' th ' war 
 sinc ' a could draw a sword , and is ill school 'd 
 in bolt languag ; meal and bran togeth 
 he throw without distinct . give me leav , 
 i 'll go to him and undertak to bring him 
 where he shall answer by a law form , 
 in peac , to hi utmost peril . 
 first senat . nobl tribun , 
 it is the human way ; the other cours 
 will prove too bloodi , and the end of it 
 unknown to the begin . 
 siciniu . nobl meneniu , 
 be you then as the peopl 's offic . 
 master , lay down your weapon . 
 brutu . go not home . 
 siciniu . meet on the market-plac . we 'll attend you there ; 
 where , if you bring not marciu , we 'll proceed 
 in our first way . 
 meneniu . i 'll bring him to you . 
 [ to the senat ] let me desir your compani ; he must come , 
 or what is worst will follow . 
 first senat . pray you let 's to him . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 rome . the hous of coriolanu 
 
 enter coriolanu with nobl 
 
 coriolanu . let them pull all about mine ear , present me 
 death on the wheel or at wild hors ' heel ; 
 or pile ten hill on the tarpeian rock , 
 that the precipit might down stretch 
 below the beam of sight ; yet will i still 
 be thu to them . 
 first patrician . you do the nobler . 
 coriolanu . i muse my mother 
 doe not approv me further , who wa wont 
 to call them woollen vassal , thing creat 
 to buy and sell with groat ; to show bare head 
 in congreg , to yawn , be still , and wonder , 
 when one but of my ordin stood up 
 to speak of peac or war . 
 
 enter volumnia 
 
 i talk of you : 
 whi did you wish me milder ? would you have me 
 fals to my natur ? rather say i play 
 the man i am . 
 volumnia . o , sir , sir , sir , 
 i would have had you put your power well on 
 befor you had worn it out . 
 coriolanu . let go . 
 volumnia . you might have been enough the man you are 
 with strive less to be so ; lesser had been 
 the thwart of your disposit , if 
 you had not show 'd them how ye were dispo 'd , 
 ere they lack 'd power to cross you . 
 coriolanu . let them hang . 
 volumnia . ay , and burn too . 
 
 enter meneniu with the senat 
 
 meneniu . come , come , you have been too rough , someth too rough ; 
 you must return and mend it . 
 first senat . there 's no remedi , 
 unless , by not so do , our good citi 
 cleav in the midst and perish . 
 volumnia . pray be counsel 'd ; 
 i have a heart as littl apt as your , 
 but yet a brain that lead my use of anger 
 to better vantag . 
 meneniu . well said , nobl woman ! 
 befor he should thu stoop to th ' herd , but that 
 the violent fit o ' th ' time crave it as physic 
 for the whole state , i would put mine armour on , 
 which i can scarc bear . 
 coriolanu . what must i do ? 
 meneniu . return to th ' tribun . 
 coriolanu . well , what then , what then ? 
 meneniu . repent what you have spoke . 
 coriolanu . for them ! i can not do it to the god ; 
 must i then do't to them ? 
 volumnia . you are too absolut ; 
 though therein you can never be too nobl 
 but when extrem speak . i have heard you say 
 honour and polici , like unsev 'd friend , 
 i ' th ' war do grow togeth ; grant that , and tell me 
 in peac what each of them by th ' other lose 
 that they combin not there . 
 coriolanu . tush , tush ! 
 meneniu . a good demand . 
 volumnia . if it be honour in your war to seem 
 the same you are not , which for your best end 
 you adopt your polici , how is it less or wors 
 that it shall hold companionship in peac 
 with honour as in war ; sinc that to both 
 it stand in like request ? 
 coriolanu . whi forc you thi ? 
 volumnia . becaus that now it lie you on to speak 
 to th ' peopl , not by your own instruct , 
 nor by th ' matter which your heart prompt you , 
 but with such word that are but rote in 
 your tongu , though but bastard and syllabl 
 of no allow to your bosom 's truth . 
 now , thi no more dishonour you at all 
 than to take in a town with gentl word , 
 which els would put you to your fortun and 
 the hazard of much blood . 
 i would dissembl with my natur where 
 my fortun and my friend at stake requir 'd 
 i should do so in honour . i am in thi 
 your wife , your son , these senat , the nobl ; 
 and you will rather show our gener lout 
 how you can frown , than spend a fawn upon 'em 
 for the inherit of their love and safeguard 
 of what that want might ruin . 
 meneniu . nobl ladi ! 
 come , go with us , speak fair ; you may salv so , 
 not what is danger present , but the lo 
 of what is past . 
 volumnia . i prithe now , my son , 
 go to them with thi bonnet in thi hand ; 
 and thu far have stretch 'd it- here be with them- 
 thi knee buss the stones- for in such busin 
 action is eloqu , and the eye of th ' ignor 
 more learn than the ears- wave thi head , 
 which often thu correct thy-stout heart , 
 now humbl as the ripest mulberri 
 that will not hold the handl . or say to them 
 thou art their soldier and , be bred in broil , 
 hast not the soft way which , thou dost confess , 
 were fit for thee to use , as they to claim , 
 in ask their good love ; but thou wilt frame 
 thyself , forsooth , hereaft their , so far 
 as thou hast power and person . 
 meneniu . thi but done 
 even as she speak , whi , their heart were your ; 
 for they have pardon , be ask 'd , as free 
 as word to littl purpos . 
 volumnia . prithe now , 
 go , and be rul 'd ; although i know thou hadst rather 
 follow thine enemi in a fieri gulf 
 than flatter him in a bower . 
 
 enter cominiu 
 
 here is cominiu . 
 cominiu . i have been i ' th ' market-plac ; and , sir , 't is fit 
 you make strong parti , or defend yourself 
 by calm or by absenc ; all 's in anger . 
 meneniu . onli fair speech . 
 cominiu . i think 'twill serv , if he 
 can thereto frame hi spirit . 
 volumnia . he must and will . 
 prithe now , say you will , and go about it . 
 coriolanu . must i go show them my unbarb 'd sconc ? must i 
 with my base tongu give to my nobl heart 
 a lie that it must bear ? well , i will do't ; 
 yet , were there but thi singl plot to lose , 
 thi mould of marciu , they to dust should grind it , 
 and throw't against the wind . to th ' market-plac ! 
 you have put me now to such a part which never 
 i shall discharg to th ' life . 
 cominiu . come , come , we 'll prompt you . 
 volumnia . i prithe now , sweet son , as thou hast said 
 my prais made thee first a soldier , so , 
 to have my prais for thi , perform a part 
 thou hast not done befor . 
 coriolanu . well , i must do't . 
 away , my disposit , and possess me 
 some harlot 's spirit ! my throat of war be turn 'd , 
 which quier 'd with my drum , into a pipe 
 small as an eunuch or the virgin voic 
 that babi lull asleep ! the smile of knave 
 tent in my cheek , and schoolboy ' tear take up 
 the glass of my sight ! a beggar 's tongu 
 make motion through my lip , and my arm 'd knee , 
 who bow 'd but in my stirrup , bend like hi 
 that hath receiv 'd an alm ! i will not do't , 
 lest i surceas to honour mine own truth , 
 and by my bodi 's action teach my mind 
 a most inher base . 
 volumnia . at thi choic , then . 
 to beg of thee , it is my more dishonour 
 than thou of them . come all to ruin . let 
 thi mother rather feel thi pride than fear 
 thi danger stout ; for i mock at death 
 with as big heart as thou . do as thou list . 
 thi valiant wa mine , thou suck'dst it from me ; 
 but owe thi pride thyself . 
 coriolanu . pray be content . 
 mother , i am go to the market-plac ; 
 chide me no more . i 'll mountebank their love , 
 cog their heart from them , and come home belov 'd 
 of all the trade in rome . look , i am go . 
 commend me to my wife . i 'll return consul , 
 or never trust to what my tongu can do 
 i ' th ' way of flatteri further . 
 volumnia . do your will . exit 
 cominiu . away ! the tribun do attend you . arm yourself 
 to answer mildli ; for they are prepar 'd 
 with accus , as i hear , more strong 
 than are upon you yet . 
 coriolanu . the word is 'mildli . ' pray you let us go . 
 let them accus me by invent ; i 
 will answer in mine honour . 
 meneniu . ay , but mildli . 
 coriolanu . well , mildli be it then- mildli . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 rome . the forum 
 
 enter siciniu and brutu 
 
 brutu . in thi point charg him home , that he affect 
 tyrann power . if he evad us there , 
 enforc him with hi envi to the peopl , 
 and that the spoil got on the antiat 
 wa ne'er distribut . 
 
 enter an aedil 
 
 what , will he come ? 
 aedil . he 's come . 
 brutu . how accompani ? 
 aedil . with old meneniu , and those senat 
 that alway favour 'd him . 
 siciniu . have you a catalogu 
 of all the voic that we have procur 'd , 
 set down by th ' poll ? 
 aedil . i have ; 't is readi . 
 siciniu . have you correct them by tribe ? 
 aedil . i have . 
 siciniu . assembl present the peopl hither ; 
 and when they hear me say 'it shall be so 
 i ' th ' right and strength o ' th ' common ' be it either 
 for death , for fine , or banish , then let them , 
 if i say fine , cri 'fine ! '- if death , cri 'death ! ' 
 insist on the old prerog 
 and power i ' th ' truth o ' th ' caus . 
 aedil . i shall inform them . 
 brutu . and when such time they have begun to cri , 
 let them not ceas , but with a din confu 'd 
 enforc the present execut 
 of what we chanc to sentenc . 
 aedil . veri well . 
 siciniu . make them be strong , and readi for thi hint , 
 when we shall hap to give't them . 
 brutu . go about it . exit aedil 
 put him to choler straight . he hath been us 'd 
 ever to conquer , and to have hi worth 
 of contradict ; be onc chaf 'd , he can not 
 be rein 'd again to temper ; then he speak 
 what 's in hi heart , and that is there which look 
 with us to break hi neck . 
 
 enter coriolanu , meneniu and cominiu , with other 
 
 siciniu . well , here he come . 
 meneniu . calmli , i do beseech you . 
 coriolanu . ay , as an ostler , that for th ' poorest piec 
 will bear the knave by th ' volum . th ' honour 'd god 
 keep rome in safeti , and the chair of justic 
 suppli with worthi men ! plant love among 's ! 
 throng our larg templ with the show of peac , 
 and not our street with war ! 
 first senat . amen , amen ! 
 meneniu . a nobl wish . 
 
 re-ent the.aedil , with the plebeian 
 
 siciniu . draw near , ye peopl . 
 aedil . list to your tribun . audienc ! peac , i say ! 
 coriolanu . first , hear me speak . 
 both tribun . well , say . peac , ho ! 
 coriolanu . shall i be charg 'd no further than thi present ? 
 must all determin here ? 
 siciniu . i do demand , 
 if you submit you to the peopl 's voic , 
 allow their offic , and are content 
 to suffer law censur for such fault 
 as shall be prov 'd upon you . 
 coriolanu . i am content . 
 meneniu . lo , citizen , he say he is content . 
 the warlik servic he ha done , consid ; think 
 upon the wound hi bodi bear , which show 
 like grave i ' th ' holi churchyard . 
 coriolanu . scratch with brier , 
 scar to move laughter onli . 
 meneniu . consid further , 
 that when he speak not like a citizen , 
 you find him like a soldier ; do not take 
 hi rougher accent for malici sound , 
 but , as i say , such as becom a soldier 
 rather than envi you . 
 cominiu . well , well ! no more . 
 coriolanu . what is the matter , 
 that be pass 'd for consul with full voic , 
 i am so dishonour 'd that the veri hour 
 you take it off again ? 
 siciniu . answer to us . 
 coriolanu . say then ; 't is true , i ought so . 
 siciniu . we charg you that you have contriv 'd to take 
 from rome all season 'd offic , and to wind 
 yourself into a power tyrann ; 
 for which you are a traitor to the peopl . 
 coriolanu . how- traitor ? 
 meneniu . nay , temper ! your promis . 
 coriolanu . the fire i ' th ' lowest hell fold in the peopl ! 
 call me their traitor ! thou injuri tribun ! 
 within thine eye sat twenti thousand death , 
 in thi hand clutch 'd as mani million , in 
 thi lie tongu both number , i would say 
 'thou liest ' unto thee with a voic as free 
 as i do pray the god . 
 siciniu . mark you thi , peopl ? 
 plebeian . to th ' rock , to th ' rock , with him ! 
 siciniu . peac ! 
 we need not put new matter to hi charg . 
 what you have seen him do and heard him speak , 
 beat your offic , curs yourselv , 
 oppos law with stroke , and here defi 
 those whose great power must tri him- even thi , 
 so crimin and in such capit kind , 
 deserv th ' extremest death . 
 brutu . but sinc he hath 
 serv 'd well for rome- 
 coriolanu . what do you prate of servic ? 
 brutu . i talk of that that know it . 
 coriolanu . you ! 
 meneniu . is thi the promis that you made your mother ? 
 cominiu . know , i pray you- 
 coriolanu . i 'll know no further . 
 let them pronounc the steep tarpeian death , 
 vagabond exil , flay , pent to linger 
 but with a grain a day , i would not buy 
 their merci at the price of one fair word , 
 nor check my courag for what they can give , 
 to have't with say 'good morrow . ' 
 siciniu . for that he has- 
 as much as in him lies- from time to time 
 envi against the peopl , seek mean 
 to pluck away their power ; as now at last 
 given hostil stroke , and that not in the presenc 
 of dread justic , but on the minist 
 that do distribut it- in the name o ' th ' peopl , 
 and in the power of us the tribun , we , 
 ev'n from thi instant , banish him our citi , 
 in peril of precipit 
 from off the rock tarpeian , never more 
 to enter our rome gate . i ' th ' peopl 's name , 
 i say it shall be so . 
 plebeian . it shall be so , it shall be so ! let him away ! 
 he 's banish 'd , and it shall be so . 
 cominiu . hear me , my master and my common friends- 
 siciniu . he 's sentenc 'd ; no more hear . 
 cominiu . let me speak . 
 i have been consul , and can show for rome 
 her enemi ' mark upon me . i do love 
 my countri 's good with a respect more tender , 
 more holi and profound , than mine own life , 
 my dear wife 's estim , her womb 's increas 
 and treasur of my loin . then if i would 
 speak that- 
 siciniu . we know your drift . speak what ? 
 brutu . there 's no more to be said , but he is banish 'd , 
 as enemi to the peopl and hi countri . 
 it shall be so . 
 plebeian . it shall be so , it shall be so . 
 coriolanu . you common cri of cur , whose breath i hate 
 as reek o ' th ' rotten fen , whose love i prize 
 as the dead carcass of unburi men 
 that do corrupt my air- i banish you . 
 and here remain with your uncertainti ! 
 let everi feebl rumour shake your heart ; 
 your enemi , with nod of their plume , 
 fan you into despair ! have the power still 
 to banish your defend , till at length 
 your ignorance- which find not till it feel , 
 make but reserv of yourselv 
 still your own foes- deliv you 
 as most abat captiv to some nation 
 that won you without blow ! despis 
 for you the citi , thu i turn my back ; 
 there is a world elsewher . 
 exeunt coriolanu , 
 cominiu , meneniu , with the other patrician 
 aedil . the peopl 's enemi is gone , is gone ! 
 [ they all shout and throw up their cap ] 
 plebeian . our enemi is banish 'd , he is gone ! hoo-oo ! 
 siciniu . go see him out at gate , and follow him , 
 as he hath follow 'd you , with all despit ; 
 give him deserv 'd vexat . let a guard 
 attend us through the citi . 
 plebeian . come , come , let 's see him out at gate ; come ! 
 the god preserv our nobl tribun ! come . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 rome . befor a gate of the citi 
 
 enter coriolanu , volumnia , virgilia , meneniu , cominiu , 
 with the young nobil of rome 
 
 coriolanu . come , leav your tear ; a brief farewel . the beast 
 with mani head butt me away . nay , mother , 
 where is your ancient courag ? you were us 'd 
 to say extrem wa the trier of spirit ; 
 that common chanc common men could bear ; 
 that when the sea wa calm all boat alik 
 show 'd mastership in float ; fortun 's blow , 
 when most struck home , be gentl wound crave 
 a nobl cun . you were us 'd to load me 
 with precept that would make invinc 
 the heart that conn 'd them . 
 virgilia . o heaven ! o heaven ! 
 coriolanu . nay , i prithe , woman- 
 volumnia . now the red pestil strike all trade in rome , 
 and occup perish ! 
 coriolanu . what , what , what ! 
 i shall be lov 'd when i am lack 'd . nay , mother , 
 resum that spirit when you were wont to say , 
 if you had been the wife of hercul , 
 six of hi labour you 'd have done , and sav 'd 
 your husband so much sweat . cominiu , 
 droop not ; adieu . farewel , my wife , my mother . 
 i 'll do well yet . thou old and true meneniu , 
 thi tear are salter than a younger man 's 
 and venom to thine eye . my sometim gener , 
 i have seen thee stern , and thou hast oft beheld 
 heart-hard'n spectacl ; tell these sad women 
 't is fond to wail inevit stroke , 
 as 't is to laugh at 'em . my mother , you wot well 
 my hazard still have been your solac ; and 
 believe't not lightly- though i go alon , 
 like to a lone dragon , that hi fen 
 make fear 'd and talk 'd of more than seen- your son 
 will or exceed the common or be caught 
 with cautel bait and practic . 
 volumnia . my first son , 
 whither wilt thou go ? take good cominiu 
 with thee awhil ; determin on some cours 
 more than a wild expostur to each chanc 
 that start i ' th ' way befor thee . 
 virgilia . o the god ! 
 cominiu . i 'll follow thee a month , devis with the 
 where thou shalt rest , that thou mayst hear of us , 
 and we of thee ; so , if the time thrust forth 
 a caus for thi repeal , we shall not send 
 o'er the vast world to seek a singl man , 
 and lose advantag , which doth ever cool 
 i ' th ' absenc of the needer . 
 coriolanu . fare ye well ; 
 thou hast year upon thee , and thou art too full 
 of the war ' surfeit to go rove with one 
 that 's yet unbrui 'd ; bring me but out at gate . 
 come , my sweet wife , my dearest mother , and 
 my friend of nobl touch ; when i am forth , 
 bid me farewel , and smile . i pray you come . 
 while i remain abov the ground you shall 
 hear from me still , and never of me aught 
 but what is like me formerli . 
 meneniu . that 's worthili 
 as ani ear can hear . come , let 's not weep . 
 if i could shake off but one seven year 
 from these old arm and leg , by the good god , 
 i 'd with thee everi foot . 
 coriolanu . give me thi hand . 
 come . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 rome . a street near the gate 
 
 enter the two tribun , siciniu and brutu with the aedil 
 
 siciniu . bid them all home ; he 's gone , and we 'll no further . 
 the nobil are vex 'd , whom we see have side 
 in hi behalf . 
 brutu . now we have shown our power , 
 let us seem humbler after it is done 
 than when it wa a-do . 
 siciniu . bid them home . 
 say their great enemi is gone , and they 
 stand in their ancient strength . 
 brutu . dismiss them home . exit aedil 
 here come hi mother . 
 
 enter volumnia , virgilia , and meneniu 
 
 siciniu . let 's not meet her . 
 brutu . whi ? 
 siciniu . they say she 's mad . 
 brutu . they have ta'en note of us ; keep on your way . 
 volumnia . o , y'are well met ; th ' hoard plagu o ' th ' god 
 requit your love ! 
 meneniu . peac , peac , be not so loud . 
 volumnia . if that i could for weep , you should hear- 
 nay , and you shall hear some . [ to brutu ] will you be gone ? 
 virgilia . [ to siciniu ] you shall stay too . i would i had the 
 power 
 to say so to my husband . 
 siciniu . are you mankind ? 
 volumnia . ay , fool ; is that a shame ? note but thi , fool : 
 wa not a man my father ? hadst thou foxship 
 to banish him that struck more blow for rome 
 than thou hast spoken word ? 
 siciniu . o bless heaven ! 
 volumnia . moe nobl blow than ever thou wise word ; 
 and for rome 's good . i 'll tell thee what- yet go ! 
 nay , but thou shalt stay too . i would my son 
 were in arabia , and thi tribe befor him , 
 hi good sword in hi hand . 
 siciniu . what then ? 
 virgilia . what then ! 
 he 'd make an end of thi poster . 
 volumnia . bastard and all . 
 good man , the wound that he doe bear for rome ! 
 meneniu . come , come , peac . 
 siciniu . i would he had continu to hi countri 
 as he began , and not unknit himself 
 the nobl knot he made . 
 brutu . i would he had . 
 volumnia . ' i would he had ! ' 't wa you incen 'd the rabble- 
 cat that can judg as fitli of hi worth 
 as i can of those mysteri which heaven 
 will not have earth to know . 
 brutu . pray , let 's go . 
 volumnia . now , pray , sir , get you gone ; 
 you have done a brave deed . ere you go , hear thi : 
 as far as doth the capitol exceed 
 the meanest hous in rome , so far my son- 
 thi ladi 's husband here , thi , do you see ? - 
 whom you have banish 'd doe exceed you an . 
 brutu . well , well , we 'll leav you . 
 siciniu . whi stay we to be bait 
 with one that want her wit ? exeunt tribun 
 volumnia . take my prayer with you . 
 i would the god had noth els to do 
 but to confirm my curs . could i meet 'em 
 but onc a day , it would unclog my heart 
 of what lie heavi to't . 
 meneniu . you have told them home , 
 and , by my troth , you have caus . you 'll sup with me ? 
 volumnia . anger 's my meat ; i sup upon myself , 
 and so shall starv with feed . come , let 's go . 
 leav thi faint pule and lament as i do , 
 in anger , juno-lik . come , come , come . 
 exeunt volumnia and virgilia 
 meneniu . fie , fie , fie ! exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 a highway between rome and antium 
 
 enter a roman and a volsc , meet 
 
 roman . i know you well , sir , and you know me ; your name , i think , 
 is adrian . 
 volsc . it is so , sir . truli , i have forgot you . 
 roman . i am a roman ; and my servic are , as you are , against 'em . 
 know you me yet ? 
 volsc . nicanor ? no ! 
 roman . the same , sir . 
 volsc . you had more beard when i last saw you , but your favour is 
 well appear 'd by your tongu . what 's the news in rome ? i have a 
 note from the volscian state , to find you out there . you have 
 well save me a day 's journey . 
 roman . there hath been in rome strang insurrect : the peopl 
 against the senat , patrician , and nobl . 
 volsc . hath been ! is it end , then ? our state think not so ; they 
 are in a most warlik prepar , and hope to come upon them in 
 the heat of their divis . 
 roman . the main blaze of it is past , but a small thing would make 
 it flame again ; for the nobl receiv so to heart the banish 
 of that worthi coriolanu that they are in a ripe apt to take 
 all power from the peopl , and to pluck from them their tribun 
 for ever . thi lie glow , i can tell you , and is almost matur 
 for the violent break out . 
 volsc . coriolanu banish 'd ! 
 roman . banish 'd , sir . 
 volsc . you will be welcom with thi intellig , nicanor . 
 roman . the day serv well for them now . i have heard it said the 
 fittest time to corrupt a man 's wife is when she 's fall'n out 
 with her husband . your nobl tullu aufidiu will appear well in 
 these war , hi great oppos , coriolanu , be now in no 
 request of hi countri . 
 volsc . he can not choos . i am most fortun thu accident to 
 encount you ; you have end my busi , and i will merrili 
 accompani you home . 
 roman . i shall between thi and supper tell you most strang thing 
 from rome , all tend to the good of their adversari . have you 
 an armi readi , say you ? 
 volsc . a most royal one : the centurion and their charg , 
 distinctli billet , alreadi in th ' entertain , and to be on 
 foot at an hour 's warn . 
 roman . i am joy to hear of their readi , and am the man , i 
 think , that shall set them in present action . so , sir , heartili 
 well met , and most glad of your compani . 
 volsc . you take my part from me , sir . i have the most caus to be 
 glad of your . 
 roman . well , let us go togeth . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 antium . befor aufidiu ' hous 
 
 enter coriolanu , in mean apparel , disgui 'd and muffl 
 
 coriolanu . a goodli citi is thi antium . citi , 
 't is i that made thi widow : mani an heir 
 of these fair edific fore my war 
 have i heard groan and drop . then know me not . 
 lest that thi wive with spit and boy with stone , 
 in puni battl slay me . 
 
 enter a citizen 
 
 save you , sir . 
 citizen . and you . 
 coriolanu . direct me , if it be your will , 
 where great aufidiu lie . is he in antium ? 
 citizen . he is , and feast the nobl of the state 
 at hi hous thi night . 
 coriolanu . which is hi hous , beseech you ? 
 citizen . thi here befor you . 
 coriolanu . thank you , sir ; farewel . exit citizen 
 o world , thi slipperi turn ! friend now fast sworn , 
 whose doubl bosom seem to wear one heart , 
 whose hour , whose bed , whose meal and exercis 
 are still togeth , who twin , as 'twere , in love , 
 unsepar , shall within thi hour , 
 on a dissens of a doit , break out 
 to bitterest enmiti ; so fellest foe , 
 whose passion and whose plot have broke their sleep 
 to take the one the other , by some chanc , 
 some trick not worth an egg , shall grow dear friend 
 and interjoin their issu . so with me : 
 my birthplac hate i , and my love 's upon 
 thi enemi town . i 'll enter . if he slay me , 
 he doe fair justic : if he give me way , 
 i 'll do hi countri servic . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 antium . aufidiu ' hous 
 
 music play . enter a servingman 
 
 first servant . wine , wine , wine ! what servic is here ! i think our 
 fellow are asleep . exit 
 
 enter anoth servingman 
 
 second servant.wher 's cotu ? my master call for him . 
 cotu ! exit 
 
 enter coriolanu 
 
 coriolanu . a goodli hous . the feast smell well , but i 
 appear not like a guest . 
 
 re-ent the first servingman 
 
 first servant . what would you have , friend ? 
 whenc are you ? here 's no place for you : pray go to the door . 
 exit 
 coriolanu . i have deserv 'd no better entertain 
 in be coriolanu . 
 
 re-ent second servingman 
 
 second servant . whenc are you , sir ? ha the porter hi eye in hi 
 head that he give entranc to such companion ? pray get you out . 
 coriolanu . away ! 
 second servant . away ? get you away . 
 coriolanu . now th ' art troublesom . 
 second servant . are you so brave ? i 'll have you talk 'd with anon . 
 
 enter a third servingman . the first meet him 
 
 third servant . what fellow 's thi ? 
 first servant . a strang one as ever i look 'd on . i can not get him 
 out o ' th ' hous . prithe call my master to him . 
 third servant . what have you to do here , fellow ? pray you avoid the 
 hous . 
 coriolanu . let me but stand- i will not hurt your hearth . 
 third servant . what are you ? 
 coriolanu . a gentleman . 
 third servant . a marv'llou poor one . 
 coriolanu . true , so i am . 
 third servant . pray you , poor gentleman , take up some other 
 station ; here 's no place for you . pray you avoid . come . 
 coriolanu . follow your function , go and batten on cold bit . 
 [ push him away from him ] 
 third servant . what , you will not ? prithe tell my master what a 
 strang guest he ha here . 
 second servant . and i shall . exit 
 third servant . where dwell'st thou ? 
 coriolanu . under the canopi . 
 third servant . under the canopi ? 
 coriolanu . ay . 
 third servant . where 's that ? 
 coriolanu . i ' th ' citi of kite and crow . 
 third servant . i ' th ' citi of kite and crow ! 
 what an ass it is ! then thou dwell'st with daw too ? 
 coriolanu . no , i serv not thi master . 
 third servant . how , sir ! do you meddl with my master ? 
 coriolanu . ay ; 't is an honest servic than to meddl with thi 
 mistress . thou prat'st and prat'st ; serv with thi trencher ; 
 henc ! [ beat him away ] 
 
 enter aufidiu with the second servingman 
 
 aufidiu . where is thi fellow ? 
 second servant . here , sir ; i 'd have beaten him like a dog , but for 
 disturb the lord within . 
 aufidiu . whenc com'st thou ? what wouldst thou ? thi name ? 
 whi speak'st not ? speak , man . what 's thi name ? 
 coriolanu . [ unmuffl ] if , tullu , 
 not yet thou know'st me , and , see me , dost not 
 think me for the man i am , necess 
 command me name myself . 
 aufidiu . what is thi name ? 
 coriolanu . a name unmus to the volscian ' ear , 
 and harsh in sound to thine . 
 aufidiu . say , what 's thi name ? 
 thou ha a grim appear , and thi face 
 bear a command i n't ; though thi tackl 's torn , 
 thou show'st a nobl vessel . what 's thi name ? 
 coriolanu . prepar thi brow to frown- know'st thou me yet ? 
 aufidiu . i know thee not . thi name ? 
 coriolanu . my name is caiu marciu , who hath done 
 to thee particularli , and to all the volsc , 
 great hurt and mischief ; thereto wit may 
 my surnam , coriolanu . the pain servic , 
 the extrem danger , and the drop of blood 
 shed for my thankless countri , are requit 
 but with that surname- a good memori 
 and wit of the malic and displeasur 
 which thou shouldst bear me . onli that name remain ; 
 the cruelti and envi of the peopl , 
 permit by our dastard nobl , who 
 have all forsook me , hath devour 'd the rest , 
 an suffer 'd me by th ' voic of slave to be 
 whoop 'd out of rome . now thi extrem 
 hath brought me to thi hearth ; not out of hope , 
 mistak me not , to save my life ; for if 
 i had fear 'd death , of all the men i ' th ' world 
 i would have 'void thee ; but in mere spite , 
 to be full quit of those my banish , 
 stand i befor thee here . then if thou hast 
 a heart of wreak in thee , that wilt reveng 
 thine own particular wrong and stop those maim 
 of shame seen through thi countri , speed thee straight 
 and make my miseri serv thi turn . so use it 
 that my reveng servic may prove 
 as benefit to thee ; for i will fight 
 against my cank'r countri with the spleen 
 of all the under fiend . but if so be 
 thou dar'st not thi , and that to prove more fortun 
 th'art tir 'd , then , in a word , i also am 
 longer to live most weari , and present 
 my throat to thee and to thi ancient malic ; 
 which not to cut would show thee but a fool , 
 sinc i have ever follow thee with hate , 
 drawn tun of blood out of thi countri 's breast , 
 and can not live but to thi shame , unless 
 it be to do thee servic . 
 aufidiu . o marciu , marciu ! 
 each word thou hast spoke hath weed from my heart 
 a root of ancient envi . if jupit 
 should from yond cloud speak divin thing , 
 and say `` ti true , ' i 'd not believ them more 
 than thee , all nobl marciu . let me twine 
 mine arm about that bodi , where against 
 my grain ash an hundr time hath broke 
 and scarr 'd the moon with splinter ; here i clip 
 the anvil of my sword , and do contest 
 as hotli and as nobli with thi love 
 as ever in ambiti strength i did 
 contend against thi valour . know thou first , 
 i lov 'd the maid i marri ; never man 
 sigh 'd truer breath ; but that i see thee here , 
 thou nobl thing , more danc my rapt heart 
 than when i first my wed mistress saw 
 bestrid my threshold . whi , thou mar , i tell the 
 we have a power on foot , and i had purpos 
 onc more to hew thi target from thi brawn , 
 or lose mine arm for't . thou hast beat me out 
 twelv sever time , and i have nightli sinc 
 dreamt of encount 'twixt thyself and me- 
 we have been down togeth in my sleep , 
 unbuckl helm , fist each other 's throat- 
 and wak 'd half dead with noth . worthi marciu , 
 had we no other quarrel els to rome but that 
 thou art thenc banish 'd , we would muster all 
 from twelv to seventi , and , pour war 
 into the bowel of ungrat rome , 
 like a bold flood o'erbeat . o , come , go in , 
 and take our friendli senat by th ' hand , 
 who now are here , take their leav of me 
 who am prepar 'd against your territori , 
 though not for rome itself . 
 coriolanu . you bless me , god ! 
 aufidiu . therefor , most . absolut sir , if thou wilt have 
 the lead of thine own reveng , take 
 th ' one half of my commiss , and set down- 
 as best thou art experienc 'd , sinc thou know'st 
 thi countri 's strength and weakness- thine own way , 
 whether to knock against the gate of rome , 
 or rude visit them in part remot 
 to fright them ere destroy . but come in ; 
 let me commend thee first to those that shall 
 say yea to thi desir . a thousand welcom ! 
 and more a friend than e'er an enemi ; 
 yet , marciu , that wa much . your hand ; most welcom ! 
 exeunt coriolanu and aufidiu 
 
 the two servingmen come forward 
 
 first servant . here 's a strang alter ! 
 second servant . by my hand , i had thought to have strucken him with 
 a cudgel ; and yet my mind gave me hi cloth made a fals report 
 of him . 
 first servant . what an arm he ha ! he turn 'd me about with hi 
 finger and hi thumb , as one would set up a top . 
 second servant . nay , i knew by hi face that there wa someth in 
 him ; he had , sir , a kind of face , methought- i can not tell how to 
 term it . 
 first servant . he had so , look as it were- would i were hang 'd , 
 but i thought there wa more in him than i could think . 
 second servant . so did i , i 'll be sworn . he is simpli the rarest 
 man i ' th ' world . 
 first servant . i think he is ; but a greater soldier than he you wot 
 on . 
 second servant . who , my master ? 
 first servant . nay , it 's no matter for that . 
 second servant . worth six on him . 
 first servant . nay , not so neither ; but i take him to be the 
 greater soldier . 
 second servant . faith , look you , one can not tell how to say that ; 
 for the defenc of a town our gener is excel . 
 first servant . ay , and for an assault too . 
 
 re-ent the third servingman 
 
 third servant . o slave , i can tell you news- news , you rascal ! 
 both . what , what , what ? let 's partak . 
 third servant . i would not be a roman , of all nation ; 
 i had as lief be a condemn 'd man . 
 both . wherefor ? wherefor ? 
 third servant . whi , here 's he that wa wont to thwack our general- 
 caiu marciu . 
 first servant . whi do you say 'thwack our gener ' ? 
 third servant . i do not say 'thwack our gener , ' but he wa alway 
 good enough for him . 
 second servant . come , we are fellow and friend . he wa ever too 
 hard for him , i have heard him say so himself . 
 first servant . he wa too hard for him directli , to say the troth 
 o n't ; befor corioli he scotch 'd him and notch 'd him like a 
 carbonado . 
 second servant . an he had been cannib given , he might have 
 broil 'd and eaten him too . 
 first servant . but more of thi news ! 
 third servant . whi , he is so made on here within as if he were son 
 and heir to mar ; set at upper end o ' th ' tabl ; no question 
 ask him by ani of the senat but they stand bald befor him . 
 our gener himself make a mistress of him , sanctifi himself 
 with 's hand , and turn up the white o ' th ' eye to hi discours . 
 but the bottom of the news is , our gener is cut i ' th ' middl 
 and but one half of what he wa yesterday , for the other ha half 
 by the entreati and grant of the whole tabl . he 'll go , he say , 
 and sowl the porter of rome gate by th ' ear ; he will mow all 
 down befor him , and leav hi passag poll 'd . 
 second servant . and he 's as like to do't as ani man i can imagin . 
 third servant . do't ! he will do't ; for look you , sir , he ha as 
 mani friend as enemi ; which friend , sir , as it were , durst 
 not- look you , sir- show themselv , as we term it , hi friend , 
 whilst he 's in directitud . 
 first servant . directitud ? what 's that ? 
 third servant . but when they shall see , sir , hi crest up again and 
 the man in blood , they will out of their burrow , like coni 
 after rain , and revel an with him . 
 first servant . but when goe thi forward ? 
 third servant . to-morrow , to-day , present . you shall have the 
 drum struck up thi afternoon ; 't is as it were parcel of their 
 feast , and to be execut ere they wipe their lip . 
 second servant . whi , then we shall have a stir world again . 
 thi peac is noth but to rust iron , increas tailor , and 
 breed ballad-mak . 
 first servant . let me have war , say i ; it exce peac as far as 
 day doe night ; it 's sprite , wake , audibl , and full of vent . 
 peac is a veri apoplexi , lethargi ; mull 'd , deaf , sleepi , 
 insens ; a getter of more bastard children than war 's a 
 destroy of men . 
 second servant . 't is so ; and as war in some sort may be said to be 
 a ravish , so it can not be deni but peac is a great maker of 
 cuckold . 
 first servant . ay , and it make men hate one anoth . 
 third servant . reason : becaus they then less need one anoth . the 
 war for my money . i hope to see roman as cheap as volscian . 
 they are rise , they are rise . 
 both . in , in , in , in ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 rome . a public place 
 
 enter the two tribun , siciniu and brutu 
 
 siciniu . we hear not of him , neither need we fear him . 
 hi remedi are tame . the present peac 
 and quiet of the peopl , which befor 
 were in wild hurri , here do make hi friend 
 blush that the world goe well ; who rather had , 
 though they themselv did suffer by't , behold 
 dissenti number pest'r street than see 
 our tradesmen sing in their shop , and go 
 about their function friendli . 
 
 enter meneniu 
 
 brutu . we stood to't in good time . is thi meneniu ? 
 siciniu . 't is he , 't is he . o , he is grown most kind 
 of late . hail , sir ! 
 meneniu . hail to you both ! 
 siciniu . your coriolanu is not much miss 'd 
 but with hi friend . the commonwealth doth stand , 
 and so would do , were he more angri at it . 
 meneniu . all 's well , and might have been much better 
 he could have temporiz 'd . 
 siciniu . where is he , hear you ? 
 meneniu . nay , i hear noth ; hi mother and hi wife 
 hear noth from him . 
 
 enter three or four citizen 
 
 citizen . the god preserv you both ! 
 siciniu . god-den , our neighbour . 
 brutu . god-den to you all , god-den to you an . 
 first citizen . ourselv , our wive , and children , on our knee 
 are bound to pray for you both . 
 siciniu . live and thrive ! 
 brutu . farewel , kind neighbour ; we wish 'd coriolanu 
 had lov 'd you as we did . 
 citizen . now the god keep you ! 
 both tribun . farewel , farewel . exeunt citizen 
 siciniu . thi is a happier and more come time 
 than when these fellow ran about the street 
 cri confus . 
 brutu . caiu marciu wa 
 a worthi offic i ' the war , but insol , 
 o'ercom with pride , ambiti past all think , 
 self-loving- 
 siciniu . and affect one sole throne , 
 without assist . 
 meneniu . i think not so . 
 siciniu . we should by thi , to all our lament , 
 if he had gone forth consul , found it so . 
 brutu . the god have well prevent it , and rome 
 sit safe and still without him . 
 
 enter an aedil 
 
 aedil . worthi tribun , 
 there is a slave , whom we have put in prison , 
 report the volsc with sever power 
 are ent'r in the roman territori , 
 and with the deepest malic of the war 
 destroy what lie befor 'em . 
 meneniu . 't is aufidiu , 
 who , hear of our marciu ' banish , 
 thrust forth hi horn again into the world , 
 which were inshel 'd when marciu stood for rome , 
 and durst not onc peep out . 
 siciniu . come , what talk you of marciu ? 
 brutu . go see thi rumour whipp 'd . it can not be 
 the volsc dare break with us . 
 meneniu . can not be ! 
 we have record that veri well it can ; 
 and three exampl of the like hath been 
 within my age . but reason with the fellow 
 befor you punish him , where he heard thi , 
 lest you shall chanc to whip your inform 
 and beat the messeng who bid bewar 
 of what is to be dread . 
 siciniu . tell not me . 
 i know thi can not be . 
 brutu . not possibl . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . the nobl in great earnest are go 
 all to the senat hous ; some news is come 
 that turn their counten . 
 siciniu . 't is thi slave- 
 go whip him fore the peopl 's eyes- hi rais , 
 noth but hi report . 
 messeng . ye , worthi sir , 
 the slave 's report is second , and more , 
 more fear , is deliv 'd . 
 siciniu . what more fear ? 
 messeng . it is spoke freeli out of mani mouths- 
 how probabl i do not know- that marciu , 
 join 'd with aufidiu , lead a power 'gainst rome , 
 and vow reveng as spaciou as between 
 the young'st and oldest thing . 
 siciniu . thi is most like ! 
 brutu . rai 'd onli that the weaker sort may wish 
 good marciu home again . 
 siciniu . the veri trick on 't . 
 meneniu . thi is unlik . 
 he and aufidiu can no more aton 
 than violent'st contrarieti . 
 
 enter a second messeng 
 
 second messeng . you are sent for to the senat . 
 a fear armi , led by caiu marciu 
 associ with aufidiu , rage 
 upon our territori , and have alreadi 
 o'erborn their way , consum 'd with fire and took 
 what lay befor them . 
 
 enter cominiu 
 
 cominiu . o , you have made good work ! 
 meneniu . what news ? what news ? 
 cominiu . you have holp to ravish your own daughter and 
 to melt the citi lead upon your pate , 
 to see your wive dishonour 'd to your noses- 
 meneniu . what 's the news ? what 's the news ? 
 cominiu . your templ burn in their cement , and 
 your franchis , whereon you stood , confin 'd 
 into an auger 's bore . 
 meneniu . pray now , your news ? 
 you have made fair work , i fear me . pray , your news . 
 if marciu should be join 'd wi ' th ' volscians- 
 cominiu . if ! 
 he is their god ; he lead them like a thing 
 made by some other deiti than natur , 
 that shape man better ; and they follow him 
 against us brat with no less confid 
 than boy pursu summer butterfli , 
 or butcher kill fli . 
 meneniu . you have made good work , 
 you and your apron men ; you that stood so much 
 upon the voic of occup and 
 the breath of garlic-eat ! 
 cominiu . he 'll shake 
 your rome about your ear . 
 meneniu . as hercul 
 did shake down mellow fruit . you have made fair work ! 
 brutu . but is thi true , sir ? 
 cominiu . ay ; and you 'll look pale 
 befor you find it other . all the region 
 do smilingli revolt , and who resist 
 are mock 'd for valiant ignor , 
 and perish constant fool . who is't can blame him ? 
 your enemi and hi find someth in him . 
 meneniu . we are all undon unless 
 the nobl man have merci . 
 cominiu . who shall ask it ? 
 the tribun can not do't for shame ; the peopl 
 deserv such piti of him as the wolf 
 doe of the shepherd ; for hi best friend , if they 
 should say 'be good to rome'- they charg 'd him even 
 as those should do that had deserv 'd hi hate , 
 and therein show 'd fike enemi . 
 meneniu . 't is true ; 
 if he were put to my hous the brand 
 that should consum it , i have not the face 
 to say 'beseech you , ceas . ' you have made fair hand , 
 you and your craft ! you have craft fair ! 
 cominiu . you have brought 
 a trembl upon rome , such as wa never 
 s ' incap of help . 
 both tribun . say not we brought it . 
 meneniu . how ! was't we ? we lov 'd him , but , like beast 
 and cowardli nobl , gave way unto your cluster , 
 who did hoot him out o ' th ' citi . 
 cominiu . but i fear 
 they 'll roar him in again . tullu aufidiu , 
 the second name of men , obey hi point 
 as if he were hi offic . desper 
 is all the polici , strength , and defenc , 
 that rome can make against them . 
 
 enter a troop of citizen 
 
 meneniu . here come the cluster . 
 and is aufidiu with him ? you are they 
 that made the air unwholesom when you cast 
 your stink greasi cap in hoot at 
 coriolanu ' exil . now he 's come , 
 and not a hair upon a soldier 's head 
 which will not prove a whip ; as mani coxcomb 
 as you threw cap up will he tumbl down , 
 and pay you for your voic . 't is no matter ; 
 if he could burn us all into one coal 
 we have deserv 'd it . 
 plebeian . faith , we hear fear news . 
 first citizen . for mine own part , 
 when i said banish him , i said 't wa piti . 
 second citizen . and so did i . 
 third citizen . and so did i ; and , to say the truth , so did veri 
 mani of us . that we did , we did for the best ; and though we 
 willingli consent to hi banish , yet it wa against our 
 will . 
 cominiu . y'are goodli thing , you voic ! 
 meneniu . you have made 
 good work , you and your cri ! shall 's to the capitol ? 
 cominiu . o , ay , what els ? 
 exeunt cominiu and meneniu 
 siciniu . go , master , get you be not dismay 'd ; 
 these are a side that would be glad to have 
 thi true which they so seem to fear . go home , 
 and show no sign of fear . 
 first citizen . the god be good to us ! come , master , let 's home . i 
 ever said we were i ' th ' wrong when we banish 'd him . 
 second citizen . so did we all . but come , let 's home . 
 exeunt citizen 
 brutu . i do not like thi news . 
 siciniu . nor i . 
 brutu . let 's to the capitol . would half my wealth 
 would buy thi for a lie ! 
 siciniu . pray let 's go . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 a camp at a short distanc from rome 
 
 enter aufidiu with hi lieuten 
 
 aufidiu . do they still fli to th ' roman ? 
 lieuten . i do not know what witchcraft 's in him , but 
 your soldier use him as the grace fore meat , 
 their talk at tabl , and their thank at end ; 
 and you are dark'n in thi action , sir , 
 even by your own . 
 aufidiu . i can not help it now , 
 unless by use mean i lame the foot 
 of our design . he bear himself more proudlier , 
 even to my person , than i thought he would 
 when first i did embrac him ; yet hi natur 
 in that 's no changel , and i must excus 
 what can not be amend . 
 lieuten . yet i wish , sir- 
 i mean , for your particular- you had not 
 join 'd in commiss with him , but either 
 had born the action of yourself , or els 
 to him had left it sole . 
 aufidiu . i understand thee well ; and be thou sure , 
 when he shall come to hi account , he know not 
 what i can urg against him . although it seem , 
 and so he think , and is no less appar 
 to th ' vulgar eye , that he bear all thing fairli 
 and show good husbandri for the volscian state , 
 fight dragon-lik , and doe achiev as soon 
 as draw hi sword ; yet he hath left undon 
 that which shall break hi neck or hazard mine 
 whene' we come to our account . 
 lieuten . sir , i beseech you , think you he 'll carri rome ? 
 aufidiu . all place yield to him ere he sit down , 
 and the nobil of rome are hi ; 
 the senat and patrician love him too . 
 the tribun are no soldier , and their peopl 
 will be as rash in the repeal as hasti 
 to expel him thenc . i think he 'll be to rome 
 as is the osprey to the fish , who take it 
 by sovereignti of natur . first he wa 
 a nobl servant to them , but he could not 
 carri hi honour even . whether 't wa pride , 
 which out of daili fortun ever taint 
 the happi man ; whether defect of judgment , 
 to fail in the dispos of those chanc 
 which he wa lord of ; or whether natur , 
 not to be other than one thing , not move 
 from th ' casqu to th ' cushion , but command peac 
 even with the same auster and garb 
 as he control 'd the war ; but one of these- 
 as he hath spice of them all- not all , 
 for i dare so far free him- made him fear 'd , 
 so hate , and so banish 'd . but he ha a merit 
 to choke it in the utt'ranc . so our virtu 
 lie in th ' interpret of the time ; 
 and power , unto itself most commend , 
 hath not a tomb so evid as a chair 
 t ' extol what it hath done . 
 one fire drive out one fire ; one nail , one nail ; 
 right by right falter , strength by strength do fail . 
 come , let 's away . when , caiu , rome is thine , 
 thou art poor'st of all ; then shortli art thou mine . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 rome . a public place 
 
 enter meneniu , cominiu , siciniu and brutu , the two tribun , with other 
 
 meneniu . no , i 'll not go . you hear what he hath said 
 which wa sometim hi gener , who lov 'd him 
 in a most dear particular . he call 'd me father ; 
 but what o ' that ? go , you that banish 'd him : 
 a mile befor hi tent fall down , and knee 
 the way into hi merci . nay , if he coy 'd 
 to hear cominiu speak , i 'll keep at home . 
 cominiu . he would not seem to know me . 
 meneniu . do you hear ? 
 cominiu . yet one time he did call me by my name . 
 i urg 'd our old acquaint , and the drop 
 that we have bled togeth . 'coriolanu ' 
 he would not answer to ; forbid all name ; 
 he wa a kind of noth , titleless , 
 till he had forg 'd himself a name i ' th ' fire 
 of burn rome . 
 meneniu . whi , so ! you have made good work . 
 a pair of tribun that have wrack 'd for rome 
 to make coal cheap- a nobl memori ! 
 cominiu . i mind him how royal 't wa to pardon 
 when it wa less expect ; he repli , 
 it wa a bare petit of a state 
 to one whom they had punish 'd . 
 meneniu . veri well . 
 could he say less ? 
 cominiu . i offer 'd to awaken hi regard 
 for 's privat friend ; hi answer to me wa , 
 he could not stay to pick them in a pile 
 of noisom musti chaff . he said 't wa folli , 
 for one poor grain or two , to leav unburnt 
 and still to nose th ' offenc . 
 meneniu . for one poor grain or two ! 
 i am one of those . hi mother , wife , hi child , 
 and thi brave fellow too- we are the grain : 
 you are the musti chaff , and you are smelt 
 abov the moon . we must be burnt for you . 
 siciniu . nay , pray be patient ; if you refus your aid 
 in thi so never-need help , yet do not 
 upbraid 's with our distress . but sure , if you 
 would be your countri 's pleader , your good tongu , 
 more than the instant armi we can make , 
 might stop our countryman . 
 meneniu . no ; i 'll not meddl . 
 siciniu . pray you go to him . 
 meneniu . what should i do ? 
 brutu . onli make trial what your love can do 
 for rome , toward marciu . 
 meneniu . well , and say that marciu 
 return me , as cominiu is return 'd , 
 unheard- what then ? 
 but as a discont friend , grief-shot 
 with hi unkind ? say't be so ? 
 siciniu . yet your good will 
 must have that thank from rome after the measur 
 as you intend well . 
 meneniu . i 'll undertake't ; 
 i think he 'll hear me . yet to bite hi lip 
 and hum at good cominiu much unheart me . 
 he wa not taken well : he had not din 'd ; 
 the vein unfil 'd , our blood is cold , and then 
 we pout upon the morn , are unapt 
 to give or to forgiv ; but when we have stuff 'd 
 these pipe and these convey of our blood 
 with wine and feed , we have suppler soul 
 than in our priest-lik fast . therefor i 'll watch him 
 till he be diet to my request , 
 and then i 'll set upon him . 
 brutu . you know the veri road into hi kind 
 and can not lose your way . 
 meneniu . good faith , i 'll prove him , 
 speed how it will . i shall ere long have knowledg 
 of my success . exit 
 cominiu . he 'll never hear him . 
 siciniu . not ? 
 cominiu . i tell you he doe sit in gold , hi eye 
 red as 'twould burn rome , and hi injuri 
 the gaoler to hi piti . i kneel 'd befor him ; 
 't wa veri faintli he said 'rise ' ; dismiss 'd me 
 thu with hi speechless hand . what he would do , 
 he sent in write after me ; what he would not , 
 bound with an oath to yield to hi condit ; 
 so that all hope is vain , 
 unless hi nobl mother and hi wife , 
 who , as i hear , mean to solicit him 
 for merci to hi countri . therefor let 's henc , 
 and with our fair entreati hast them on . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the volscian camp befor rome 
 
 enter meneniu to the watch on guard 
 
 first watch . stay . whenc are you ? 
 second watch . stand , and go back . 
 meneniu . you guard like men , 't is well ; but , by your leav , 
 i am an offic of state and come 
 to speak with coriolanu . 
 first watch . from whenc ? 
 meneniu . from rome . 
 first watch . you may not pass ; you must return . our gener 
 will no more hear from thenc . 
 second watch . you 'll see your rome embrac 'd with fire befor 
 you 'll speak with coriolanu . 
 meneniu . good my friend , 
 if you have heard your gener talk of rome 
 and of hi friend there , it is lot to blank 
 my name hath touch 'd your ear : it is meneniu . 
 first watch . be it so ; go back . the virtu of your name 
 is not here passabl . 
 meneniu . i tell thee , fellow , 
 thi gener is my lover . i have been 
 the book of hi good act whenc men have read 
 hi fame unparallel 'd hapli amplifi ; 
 for i have ever verifi my friends- 
 of whom he 's chief- with all the size that veriti 
 would without laps suffer . nay , sometim , 
 like to a bowl upon a subtl ground , 
 i have tumbl past the throw , and in hi prais 
 have almost stamp 'd the leas ; therefor , fellow , 
 i must have leav to pass . 
 first watch . faith , sir , if you had told as mani lie in hi behalf 
 as you have utter word in your own , you should not pass here ; 
 no , though it were as virtuou to lie as to live chast . 
 therefor go back . 
 meneniu . prithe , fellow , rememb my name is meneniu , alway 
 factionari on the parti of your gener . 
 second watch . howsoev you have been hi liar , as you say you 
 have , i am one that , tell true under him , must say you can not 
 pass . therefor go back . 
 meneniu . ha he din 'd , canst thou tell ? for i would not speak with 
 him till after dinner . 
 first watch . you are a roman , are you ? 
 meneniu . i am as thi gener is . 
 first watch . then you should hate rome , as he doe . can you , when 
 you have push 'd out your gate the veri defend of them , and in 
 a violent popular ignor given your enemi your shield , think 
 to front hi reveng with the easi groan of old women , the 
 virgin palm of your daughter , or with the palsi 
 intercess of such a decay 'd dotant as you seem to be ? can you 
 think to blow out the intend fire your citi is readi to flame 
 in with such weak breath as thi ? no , you are deceiv 'd ; therefor 
 back to rome and prepar for your execut . you are condemn 'd ; 
 our gener ha sworn you out of repriev and pardon . 
 meneniu . sirrah , if thi captain knew i were here , he would use me 
 with estim . 
 first watch . come , my captain know you not . 
 meneniu . i mean thi gener . 
 first watch . my gener care not for you . back , i say ; go , lest i 
 let forth your half pint of blood . back- that 's the utmost of 
 your have . back . 
 meneniu . nay , but fellow , fellow- 
 
 enter coriolanu with aufidiu 
 
 coriolanu . what 's the matter ? 
 meneniu . now , you companion , i 'll say an errand for you ; you shall 
 know now that i am in estim ; you shall perceiv that a jack 
 guardant can not offic me from my son coriolanu . guess but by my 
 entertain with him if thou stand'st not i ' th ' state of 
 hang , or of some death more long in spectatorship and crueller 
 in suffer ; behold now present , and swoon for what 's to come 
 upon thee . the gloriou god sit in hourli synod about thi 
 particular prosper , and love thee no wors than thi old father 
 meneniu doe ! o my son ! my son ! thou art prepar fire for us ; 
 look thee , here 's water to quench it . i wa hardli move to come 
 to thee ; but be assur none but myself could move thee , i 
 have been blown out of your gate with sigh , and conjur thee to 
 pardon rome and thi petitionari countrymen . the good god assuag 
 thi wrath , and turn the dreg of it upon thi varlet here ; thi , 
 who , like a block , hath deni my access to thee . 
 coriolanu . away ! 
 meneniu . how ! away ! 
 coriolanu . wife , mother , child , i know not . my affair 
 are servant to other . though i owe 
 my reveng properli , my remiss lie 
 in volscian breast . that we have been familiar , 
 ingrat forget shall poison rather 
 than piti note how much . therefor be gone . 
 mine ear against your suit are stronger than 
 your gate against my forc . yet , for i lov 'd thee , 
 take thi along ; i writ it for thi sake [ give a letter ] 
 and would have sent it . anoth word , meneniu , 
 i will not hear thee speak . thi man , aufidiu , 
 wa my belov 'd in rome ; yet thou behold'st . 
 aufidiu . you keep a constant temper . 
 exeunt coriolanu and aufidiu 
 first watch . now , sir , is your name meneniu ? 
 second watch . 't is a spell , you see , of much power ! you know the 
 way home again . 
 first watch . do you hear how we are shent for keep your 
 great back ? 
 second watch . what caus , do you think , i have to swoon ? 
 meneniu . i neither care for th ' world nor your gener ; for such 
 thing as you , i can scarc think there 's ani , y'are so slight . 
 he that hath a will to die by himself fear it not from anoth . 
 let your gener do hi worst . for you , be that you are , long ; 
 and your miseri increas with your age ! i say to you , as i wa 
 said to : away ! exit 
 first watch . a nobl fellow , i warrant him . 
 second watch . the worthi fellow is our gener ; he 's the rock , the 
 oak not to be wind-shaken . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the tent of coriolanu 
 
 enter coriolanu , aufidiu , and other 
 
 coriolanu . we will befor the wall of rome to-morrow 
 set down our host . my partner in thi action , 
 you must report to th ' volscian lord how plainli 
 i have born thi busi . 
 aufidiu . onli their end 
 you have respect ; stopp 'd your ear against 
 the gener suit of rome ; never admit 
 a privat whisper- no , not with such friend 
 that thought them sure of you . 
 coriolanu . thi last old man , 
 whom with crack 'd heart i have sent to rome , 
 lov 'd me abov the measur of a father ; 
 nay , god me inde . their latest refug 
 wa to send him ; for whose old love i have- 
 though i show 'd sourli to him- onc more offer 'd 
 the first condit , which they did refus 
 and can not now accept . to grace him onli , 
 that thought he could do more , a veri littl 
 i have yield to ; fresh embassi and suit , 
 nor from the state nor privat friend , hereaft 
 will i lend ear to . [ shout within ] ha ! what shout is thi ? 
 shall i be tempt to infring my vow 
 in the same time 't is made ? i will not . 
 
 enter , in mourn habit , virgilia , volumnia , valeria , 
 young marciu , with attend 
 
 my wife come foremost , then the honour 'd mould 
 wherein thi trunk wa fram 'd , and in her hand 
 the grandchild to her blood . but out , affect ! 
 all bond and privileg of natur , break ! 
 let it be virtuou to be obstin . 
 what is that curtsi worth ? or those dove ' eye , 
 which can make god forsworn ? i melt , and am not 
 of stronger earth than other . my mother bow , 
 as if olympu to a molehil should 
 in supplic nod ; and my young boy 
 hath an aspect of intercess which 
 great natur cri 'deni not . ' let the volsc 
 plough rome and harrow itali ; i 'll never 
 be such a gosl to obey instinct , but stand 
 as if a man were author of himself 
 and knew no other kin . 
 virgilia . my lord and husband ! 
 coriolanu . these eye are not the same i wore in rome . 
 virgilia . the sorrow that deliv us thu chang 'd 
 make you think so . 
 coriolanu . like a dull actor now 
 i have forgot my part and i am out , 
 even to a full disgrac . best of my flesh , 
 forgiv my tyranni ; but do not say , 
 for that , 'forgiv our roman . ' o , a kiss 
 long as my exil , sweet as my reveng ! 
 now , by the jealou queen of heaven , that kiss 
 i carri from thee , dear , and my true lip 
 hath virgin 'd it e'er sinc . you god ! i prate , 
 and the most nobl mother of the world 
 leav unsalut . sink , my knee , i ' th ' earth ; [ kneel ] 
 of thi deep duti more impress show 
 than that of common son . 
 volumnia . o , stand up blest ! 
 whilst with no softer cushion than the flint 
 i kneel befor thee , and unproperli 
 show duti , as mistaken all thi while 
 between the child and parent . [ kneel ] 
 coriolanu . what 's thi ? 
 your knee to me , to your correct son ? 
 then let the pebbl on the hungri beach 
 fillip the star ; then let the mutin wind 
 strike the proud cedar 'gainst the fieri sun , 
 murd'r imposs , to make 
 what can not be slight work . 
 volumnia . thou art my warrior ; 
 i holp to frame thee . do you know thi ladi ? 
 coriolanu . the nobl sister of publicola , 
 the moon of rome , chast as the icicl 
 that 's curdi by the frost from purest snow , 
 and hang on dian 's temple- dear valeria ! 
 volumnia . thi is a poor epitom of your , 
 which by th ' interpret of full time 
 may show like all yourself . 
 coriolanu . the god of soldier , 
 with the consent of suprem jove , inform 
 thi thought with nobl , that thou mayst prove 
 to shame unvulner , and stick i ' th ' war 
 like a great sea-mark , stand everi flaw , 
 and save those that eye thee ! 
 volumnia . your knee , sirrah . 
 coriolanu . that 's my brave boy . 
 volumnia . even he , your wife , thi ladi , and myself , 
 are suitor to you . 
 coriolanu . i beseech you , peac ! 
 or , if you 'd ask , rememb thi befor : 
 the thing i have forsworn to grant may never 
 be held by you denial . do not bid me 
 dismiss my soldier , or capitul 
 again with rome 's mechan . tell me not 
 wherein i seem unnatur ; desir not 
 t'allay my rage and reveng with 
 your colder reason . 
 volumnia . o , no more , no more ! 
 you have said you will not grant us ani thing- 
 for we have noth els to ask but that 
 which you deni alreadi ; yet we will ask , 
 that , if you fail in our request , the blame 
 may hang upon your hard ; therefor hear us . 
 coriolanu . aufidiu , and you volsc , mark ; for we 'll 
 hear nought from rome in privat . your request ? 
 volumnia . should we be silent and not speak , our raiment 
 and state of bodi would bewray what life 
 we have led sinc thi exil . think with thyself 
 how more unfortun than all live women 
 are we come hither ; sinc that thi sight , which should 
 make our eye flow with joy , heart danc with comfort , 
 constrain them weep and shake with fear and sorrow , 
 make the mother , wife , and child , to see 
 the son , the husband , and the father , tear 
 hi countri 's bowel out . and to poor we 
 thine enmiti 's most capit : thou bar'st us 
 our prayer to the god , which is a comfort 
 that all but we enjoy . for how can we , 
 ala , how can we for our countri pray , 
 whereto we are bound , togeth with thi victori , 
 whereto we are bound ? alack , or we must lose 
 the countri , our dear nurs , or els thi person , 
 our comfort in the countri . we must find 
 an evid calam , though we had 
 our wish , which side should win ; for either thou 
 must as a foreign recreant be led 
 with manacl through our street , or els 
 triumphantli tread on thi countri 's ruin , 
 and bear the palm for have brave shed 
 thi wife and children 's blood . for myself , son , 
 i purpos not to wait on fortun till 
 these war determin ; if i can not persuad thee 
 rather to show a nobl grace to both part 
 than seek the end of one , thou shalt no sooner 
 march to assault thi countri than to tread- 
 trust to't , thou shalt not- on thi mother 's womb 
 that brought thee to thi world . 
 virgilia . ay , and mine , 
 that brought you forth thi boy to keep your name 
 live to time . 
 boy . ' a shall not tread on me ! 
 i 'll run away till i am bigger , but then i 'll fight . 
 coriolanu . not of a woman 's tender to be 
 requir nor child nor woman 's face to see . 
 i have sat too long . [ rise ] 
 volumnia . nay , go not from us thu . 
 if it were so that our request did tend 
 to save the roman , therebi to destroy 
 the volsc whom you serv , you might condemn us 
 as poison of your honour . no , our suit 
 is that you reconcil them : while the volsc 
 may say 'thi merci we have show 'd , ' the roman 
 'thi we receiv 'd , ' and each in either side 
 give the all-hail to thee , and cri 'be blest 
 for make up thi peac ! ' thou know'st , great son , 
 the end of war 's uncertain ; but thi certain , 
 that , if thou conquer rome , the benefit 
 which thou shalt therebi reap is such a name 
 whose repetit will be dogg 'd with curs ; 
 whose chronicl thu writ : 'the man wa nobl , 
 but with hi last attempt he wip 'd it out , 
 destroy 'd hi countri , and hi name remain 
 to th ' ensu age abhorr 'd . ' speak to me , son . 
 thou hast affect the fine strain of honour , 
 to imit the grace of the god , 
 to tear with thunder the wide cheek o ' th ' air , 
 and yet to charg thi sulphur with a bolt 
 that should but rive an oak . whi dost not speak ? 
 think'st thou it honour for a nobl man 
 still to rememb wrong ? daughter , speak you : 
 he care not for your weep . speak thou , boy ; 
 perhap thi childish will move him more 
 than can our reason . there 's no man in the world 
 more bound to 's mother , yet here he let me prate 
 like one i ' th ' stock . thou hast never in thi life 
 show 'd thi dear mother ani courtesi , 
 when she , poor hen , fond of no second brood , 
 ha cluck 'd thee to the war , and safe home 
 loaden with honour . say my request 's unjust , 
 and spurn me back ; but if it he not so , 
 thou art not honest , and the god will plagu thee , 
 that thou restrain'st from me the duti which 
 to a mother 's part belong . he turn away . 
 down , ladi ; let us shame him with our knee . 
 to hi surnam coriolanu 'long more pride 
 than piti to our prayer . down . an end ; 
 thi is the last . so we will home to rome , 
 and die among our neighbour . nay , behold 's ! 
 thi boy , that can not tell what he would have 
 but kneel and hold up hand for fellowship , 
 doe reason our petit with more strength 
 than thou hast to deny't . come , let us go . 
 thi fellow had a volscian to hi mother ; 
 hi wife is in corioli , and hi child 
 like him by chanc . yet give us our dispatch . 
 i am hush 'd until our citi be afir , 
 and then i 'll speak a littl . 
 [ he hold her by the hand , silent ] 
 coriolanu . o mother , mother ! 
 what have you done ? behold , the heaven do ope , 
 the god look down , and thi unnatur scene 
 they laugh at . o my mother , mother ! o ! 
 you have won a happi victori to rome ; 
 but for your son- believ it , o , believ it ! - 
 most danger you have with him prevail 'd , 
 if not most mortal to him . but let it come . 
 aufidiu , though i can not make true war , 
 i 'll frame conveni peac . now , good aufidiu , 
 were you in my stead , would you have heard 
 a mother less , or grant less , aufidiu ? 
 aufidiu . i wa mov 'd withal . 
 coriolanu . i dare be sworn you were ! 
 and , sir , it is no littl thing to make 
 mine eye to sweat compass . but , good sir , 
 what peac you'fl make , advis me . for my part , 
 i 'll not to rome , i 'll back with you ; and pray you 
 stand to me in thi caus . o mother ! wife ! 
 aufidiu . [ asid ] i am glad thou hast set thi merci and thi 
 honour 
 at differ in thee . out of that i 'll work 
 myself a former fortun . 
 coriolanu . [ to the ladi ] ay , by and by ; 
 but we will drink togeth ; and you shall bear 
 a better wit back than word , which we , 
 on like condit , will have counter-s 'd . 
 come , enter with us . ladi , you deserv 
 to have a templ built you . all the sword 
 in itali , and her confeder arm , 
 could not have made thi peac . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 rome . a public place 
 
 enter meneniu and siciniu 
 
 meneniu . see you yond coign o ' th ' capitol , yond cornerston ? 
 siciniu . whi , what of that ? 
 meneniu . if it be possibl for you to displac it with your littl 
 finger , there is some hope the ladi of rome , especi hi 
 mother , may prevail with him . but i say there is no hope i n't ; 
 our throat are sentenc 'd , and stay upon execut . 
 siciniu . is't possibl that so short a time can alter the 
 condit of a man ? 
 meneniu . there is differ between a grub and a butterfli ; yet 
 your butterfli wa a grub . thi marciu is grown from man to 
 dragon ; he ha wing , he 's more than a creep thing . 
 siciniu . he lov 'd hi mother dearli . 
 meneniu . so did he me ; and he no more rememb hi mother now 
 than an eight-year-old hors . the tart of hi face sour ripe 
 grape ; when he walk , he move like an engin and the ground 
 shrink befor hi tread . he is abl to pierc a corslet with 
 hi eye , talk like a knell , and hi hum is a batteri . he sit in 
 hi state as a thing made for alexand . what he bid be done is 
 finish 'd with hi bid . he want noth of a god but 
 etern , and a heaven to throne in . 
 siciniu . yes- merci , if you report him truli . 
 meneniu . i paint him in the charact . mark what merci hi mother 
 shall bring from him . there is no more merci in him than there is 
 milk in a male tiger ; that shall our poor citi find . and all thi 
 is 'long of you . 
 siciniu . the god be good unto us ! 
 meneniu . no , in such a case the god will not be good unto us . 
 when we banish 'd him we respect not them ; and , he return to 
 break our neck , they respect not us . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . sir , if you 'd save your life , fli to your hous . 
 the plebeian have got your fellow tribun 
 and hale him up and down ; all swear if 
 the roman ladi bring not comfort home 
 they 'll give him death by inch . 
 
 enter anoth messeng 
 
 siciniu . what 's the news ? 
 second messeng . good news , good news ! the ladi have prevail 'd , 
 the volscian are dislodg 'd , and marciu gone . 
 a merrier day did never yet greet rome , 
 no , not th ' expuls of the tarquin . 
 siciniu . friend , 
 art thou certain thi is true ? is't most certain ? 
 second messeng . as certain as i know the sun is fire . 
 where have you lurk 'd , that you make doubt of it ? 
 ne'er through an arch so hurri the blown tide 
 as the recomfort through th ' gate . whi , hark you ! 
 [ trumpet , hautboy , drum beat , all togeth ] 
 the trumpet , sackbut , psalteri , and fife , 
 tabor and cymbal , and the shout roman , 
 make the sun danc . hark you ! [ a shout within ] 
 meneniu . thi is good news . 
 i will go meet the ladi . thi volumnia 
 is worth of consul , senat , patrician , 
 a citi full ; of tribun such as you , 
 a sea and land full . you have pray 'd well to-day : 
 thi morn for ten thousand of your throat 
 i 'd not have given a doit . hark , how they joy ! 
 [ sound still with the shout ] 
 siciniu . first , the god bless you for your tide ; next , 
 accept my thank . 
 second messeng . sir , we have all 
 great caus to give great thank . 
 siciniu . they are near the citi ? 
 messeng . almost at point to enter . 
 siciniu . we 'll meet them , 
 and help the joy . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 rome . a street near the gate 
 
 enter two senat with volumnia , virgilia , valeria , pass over the stage , 
 'with other lord 
 
 first senat . behold our patro , the life of rome ! 
 call all your tribe togeth , prais the god , 
 and make triumphant fire ; strew flower befor them . 
 unshout the nois that banish 'd marciu , 
 repeal him with the welcom of hi mother ; 
 all . welcom , ladi , welcom ! 
 [ a flourish with drum and trumpet . exeunt ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 corioli . a public place 
 
 enter tullu aufidiu with attend 
 
 aufidiu . go tell the lord o ' th ' citi i am here ; 
 deliv them thi paper ' have read it , 
 bid them repair to th ' market-plac , where i , 
 even in their and in the common ' ear , 
 will vouch the truth of it . him i accus 
 the citi port by thi hath enter 'd and 
 intend t ' appear befor the peopl , hope 
 to purg himself with word . dispatch . 
 exeunt attend 
 
 enter three or four conspir of aufidiu ' faction 
 
 most welcom ! 
 first conspir . how is it with our gener ? 
 aufidiu . even so 
 as with a man by hi own alm empoison 'd , 
 and with hi chariti slain . 
 second conspir . most nobl sir , 
 if you do hold the same intent wherein 
 you wish 'd us parti , we 'll deliv you 
 of your great danger . 
 aufidiu . sir , i can not tell ; 
 we must proceed as we do find the peopl . 
 third conspir . the peopl will remain uncertain whilst 
 'twixt you there 's differ ; but the fall of either 
 make the survivor heir of all . 
 aufidiu . i know it ; 
 and my pretext to strike at him admit 
 a good construct . i rai 'd him , and i pawn 'd 
 mine honour for hi truth ; who be so heighten 'd , 
 he water hi new plant with dew of flatteri , 
 seduc so my friend ; and to thi end 
 he bow 'd hi natur , never known befor 
 but to be rough , unsway , and free . 
 third conspir . sir , hi stout 
 when he did stand for consul , which he lost 
 by lack of stooping- 
 aufidiu . that i would have spoken of . 
 be banish 'd for't , he came unto my hearth , 
 present to my knife hi throat . i took him ; 
 made him joint-serv with me ; gave him way 
 in all hi own desir ; nay , let him choos 
 out of my file , hi project to accomplish , 
 my best and freshest men ; serv 'd hi design 
 in mine own person ; holp to reap the fame 
 which he did end all hi , and took some pride 
 to do myself thi wrong . till , at the last , 
 i seem 'd hi follow , not partner ; and 
 he wag 'd me with hi counten as if 
 i had been mercenari . 
 first conspir . so he did , my lord . 
 the armi marvel 'd at it ; and , in the last , 
 when he had carri rome and that we look 'd 
 for no less spoil than glory- 
 aufidiu . there wa it ; 
 for which my sinew shall be stretch 'd upon him . 
 at a few drop of women 's rheum , which are 
 as cheap as lie , he sold the blood and labour 
 of our great action ; therefor shall he die , 
 and i 'll renew me in hi fall . but , hark ! 
 [ drum and 
 trumpet sound , with great shout of the peopl ] 
 first conspir . your nativ town you enter 'd like a post , 
 and had no welcom home ; but he return 
 split the air with nois . 
 second conspir . and patient fool , 
 whose children he hath slain , their base throat tear 
 with give him glori . 
 third conspir . therefor , at your vantag , 
 ere he express himself or move the peopl 
 with what he would say , let him feel your sword , 
 which we will second . when he lie along , 
 after your way hi tale pronounc 'd shall buri 
 hi reason with hi bodi . 
 aufidiu . say no more : 
 here come the lord . 
 
 enter the lord of the citi 
 
 lord . you are most welcom home . 
 aufidiu . i have not deserv 'd it . 
 but , worthi lord , have you with heed perus 
 what i have written to you ? 
 lord . we have . 
 first lord . and griev to hear't . 
 what fault he made befor the last , i think 
 might have found easi fine ; but there to end 
 where he wa to begin , and give away 
 the benefit of our levi , answer us 
 with our own charg , make a treati where 
 there wa a yielding- thi admit no excus . 
 aufidiu . he approach ; you shall hear him . 
 
 enter coriolanu , march with drum and colour ; 
 the common be with him 
 
 coriolanu . hail , lord ! i am return 'd your soldier ; 
 no more infect with my countri 's love 
 than when i part henc , but still subsist 
 under your great command . you are to know 
 that prosper i have attempt , and 
 with bloodi passag led your war even to 
 the gate of rome . our spoil we have brought home 
 doth more than counterpois a full third part 
 the charg of the action . we have made peac 
 with no less honour to the antiat 
 than shame to th ' roman ; and we here deliv , 
 subscrib 'd by th ' consul and patrician , 
 togeth with the seal o ' th ' senat , what 
 we have compound on . 
 aufidiu . read it not , nobl lord ; 
 but tell the traitor in the highest degre 
 he hath abu 'd your power . 
 coriolanu . traitor ! how now ? 
 aufidiu . ay , traitor , marciu . 
 coriolanu . marciu ! 
 aufidiu . ay , marciu , caiu marciu ! dost thou think 
 i 'll grace thee with that robberi , thi stol'n name 
 coriolanu , in corioli ? 
 you lord and head o ' th ' state , perfidi 
 he ha betray 'd your busi and given up , 
 for certain drop of salt , your citi rome- 
 i say your city- to hi wife and mother ; 
 break hi oath and resolut like 
 a twist of rotten silk ; never admit 
 counsel o ' th ' war ; but at hi nurs 's tear 
 he whin 'd and roar 'd away your victori , 
 that page blush 'd at him , and men of heart 
 look 'd wond'r each at other . 
 coriolanu . hear'st thou , mar ? 
 aufidiu . name not the god , thou boy of tears- 
 coriolanu . ha ! 
 aufidiu . -no more . 
 coriolanu . measureless liar , thou hast made my heart 
 too great for what contain it . 'boy ' ! o slave ! 
 pardon me , lord , 't is the first time that ever 
 i wa forc 'd to scold . your judgment , my grave lord , 
 must give thi cur the lie ; and hi own notion- 
 who wear my stripe impress 'd upon him , that 
 must bear my beat to hi grave- shall join 
 to thrust the lie unto him . 
 first lord . peac , both , and hear me speak . 
 coriolanu . cut me to piec , volsc ; men and lad , 
 stain all your edg on me . 'boy ' ! fals hound ! 
 if you have writ your annal true , 't is there 
 that , like an eagl in a dove-cot , i 
 flutter 'd your volscian in corioli . 
 alon i did it . 'boy ' ! 
 aufidiu . whi , nobl lord , 
 will you be put in mind of hi blind fortun , 
 which wa your shame , by thi unholi braggart , 
 fore your own eye and ear ? 
 conspir . let him die for't . 
 all the peopl . tear him to piec . do it present . he kill 'd my 
 son . my daughter . he kill 'd my cousin marcu . he kill 'd my 
 father . 
 second lord . peac , ho ! no outrage- peac ! 
 the man is nobl , and hi fame fold in 
 thi orb o ' th ' earth . hi last offenc to us 
 shall have judici hear . stand , aufidiu , 
 and troubl not the peac . 
 coriolanu . o that i had him , 
 with six aufidius , or more- hi tribe , 
 to use my law sword ! 
 aufidiu . insol villain ! 
 conspir . kill , kill , kill , kill , kill him ! 
 [ the conspir draw and kill coriolanu , who fall . 
 aufidiu stand on him ] 
 lord . hold , hold , hold , hold ! 
 aufidiu . my nobl master , hear me speak . 
 first lord . o tullu ! 
 second lord . thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep . 
 third lord . tread not upon him . master all , be quiet ; 
 put up your sword . 
 aufidiu . my lord , when you shall know- as in thi rage , 
 provok 'd by him , you can not - the great danger 
 which thi man 's life did owe you , you 'll rejoic 
 that he is thu cut off . pleas it your honour 
 to call me to your senat , i 'll deliv 
 myself your loyal servant , or endur 
 your heaviest censur . 
 first lord . bear from henc hi bodi , 
 and mourn you for him . let him be regard 
 as the most nobl cors that ever herald 
 did follow to hi um . 
 second lord . hi own impati 
 take from aufidiu a great part of blame . 
 let 's make the best of it . 
 aufidiu . my rage is gone , 
 and i am struck with sorrow . take him up . 
 help , three o ' th ' chiefest soldier ; i 'll be one . 
 beat thou the drum , that it speak mourn ; 
 trail your steel pike . though in thi citi he 
 hath widow and unchild mani a one , 
 which to thi hour bewail the injuri , 
 yet he shall have a nobl memori . 
 assist . exeunt , bear the bodi of coriolanu 
 [ a dead march sound ] 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 cymbelin 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 king henri the sixth 
 duke of gloucest , uncl to the king , and protector 
 duke of bedford , uncl to the king , and regent of franc 
 thoma beaufort , duke of exet , great-uncl to the king 
 henri beaufort , great-uncl to the king , bishop of winchest , 
 and afterward cardin 
 john beaufort , earl of somerset , afterward duke 
 richard plantagenet , son of richard late earl of cambridg , 
 afterward duke of york 
 earl of warwick 
 earl of salisburi 
 earl of suffolk 
 lord talbot , afterward earl of shrewsburi 
 john talbot , hi son 
 edmund mortim , earl of march 
 sir john fastolf 
 sir william luci 
 sir william glansdal 
 sir thoma gargrav 
 mayor of london 
 woodvil , lieuten of the tower 
 vernon , of the white rose or york faction 
 basset , of the red rose or lancast faction 
 a lawyer 
 gaoler , to mortim 
 charl , dauphin , and afterward king of franc 
 reignier , duke of anjou , and titular king of napl 
 duke of burgundi 
 duke of alencon 
 bastard of orlean 
 governor of pari 
 master-gunn of orlean , and hi son 
 gener of the french forc in bordeaux 
 a french sergeant 
 a porter 
 an old shepherd , father to joan la pucel 
 margaret , daughter to reignier , afterward marri to 
 king henri 
 countess of auvergn 
 joan la pucel , commonli call joan of arc 
 
 lord , warder of the tower , herald , offic , soldier , 
 messeng , english and french attend . fiend appear 
 to la pucel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 england and franc 
 
 
 
 
 the first part of king henri the sixth 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 westminst abbey 
 
 dead march . enter the funer of king henri the fifth , 
 attend on by the duke of bedford , regent of franc , 
 the duke of gloucest , protector , the duke of exet , 
 the earl of warwick , the bishop of winchest 
 
 bedford . hung be the heaven with black , yield day to 
 night ! comet , import chang of time and state , 
 brandish your crystal tress in the sky 
 and with them scourg the bad revolt star 
 that have consent unto henri 's death ! 
 king henri the fifth , too famou to live long ! 
 england ne'er lost a king of so much worth . 
 gloucest . england ne'er had a king until hi time . 
 virtu he had , deserv to command ; 
 hi brandish 'd sword did blind men with hi beam ; 
 hi arm spread wider than a dragon 's wing ; 
 hi sparkl eye , replet with wrath fire , 
 more dazzl and drove back hi enemi 
 than mid-day sun fierc bent against their face . 
 what should i say ? hi deed exceed all speech : 
 he ne'er lift up hi hand but conquer . 
 exet . we mourn in black ; whi mourn we not in blood ? 
 henri is dead and never shall reviv . 
 upon a wooden coffin we attend ; 
 and death 's dishonour victori 
 we with our state presenc glorifi , 
 like captiv bound to a triumphant car . 
 what ! shall we curs the planet of mishap 
 that plot thu our glori 's overthrow ? 
 or shall we think the subtle-wit french 
 conjur and sorcer , that , afraid of him , 
 by magic vers have contriv 'd hi end ? 
 winchest . he wa a king bless 'd of the king of king ; 
 unto the french the dread judgment-day 
 so dread will not be as wa hi sight . 
 the battl of the lord of host he fought ; 
 the church 's prayer made him so prosper . 
 gloucest . the church ! where is it ? had not churchmen 
 pray 'd , 
 hi thread of life had not so soon decay 'd . 
 none do you like but an effemin princ , 
 whom like a school-boy you may overaw . 
 winchest . gloucest , whate' we like , thou art 
 protector 
 and lookest to command the princ and realm . 
 thi wife is proud ; she holdeth thee in awe 
 more than god or religi churchmen may . 
 gloucest . name not religion , for thou lov'st the flesh ; 
 and ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st , 
 except it be to pray against thi foe . 
 bedford . ceas , ceas these jar and rest your mind in peac ; 
 let 's to the altar . herald , wait on us . 
 instead of gold , we 'll offer up our arm , 
 sinc arm avail not , now that henri 's dead . 
 poster , await for wretch year , 
 when at their mother ' moist'n eye babe shall suck , 
 our isl be made a nourish of salt tear , 
 and none but women left to wail the dead . 
 henri the fifth , thi ghost i invoc : 
 prosper thi realm , keep it from civil broil , 
 combat with advers planet in the heaven . 
 a far more gloriou star thi soul will make 
 than juliu caesar or bright 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . my honour lord , health to you all ! 
 sad tide bring i to you out of franc , 
 of loss , of slaughter , and discomfitur : 
 guienn , champagn , rheim , orlean , 
 pari , guysor , poictier , are all quit lost . 
 bedford . what say'st thou , man , befor dead henri 's cors ? 
 speak softli , or the loss of those great town 
 will make him burst hi lead and rise from death . 
 gloucest . is pari lost ? is rouen yield up ? 
 if henri were recal 'd to life again , 
 these news would caus him onc more yield the ghost . 
 exet . how were they lost ? what treacheri wa us 'd ? 
 messeng . no treacheri , but want of men and money . 
 amongst the soldier thi is mutter 
 that here you maintain sever faction ; 
 and whilst a field should be dispatch 'd and fought , 
 you are disput of your gener : 
 one would have ling'r war , with littl cost ; 
 anoth would fli swift , but wanteth wing ; 
 a third think , without expens at all , 
 by guil fair word peac may be obtain 'd . 
 awak , awak , english nobil ! 
 let not sloth dim your honour , new-begot . 
 cropp 'd are the flower-de-luc in your arm ; 
 of england 's coat one half is cut away . 
 exet . were our tear want to thi funer , 
 these tide would call forth their flow tide . 
 bedford . me they concern ; regent i am of franc . 
 give me my steel coat ; i 'll fight for franc . 
 away with these disgrac wail robe ! 
 wound will i lend the french instead of eye , 
 to weep their intermiss miseri . 
 
 enter a second messeng 
 
 second messeng . lord , view these letter full of bad 
 mischanc . 
 franc is revolt from the english quit , 
 except some petti town of no import . 
 the dauphin charl is crown king in rheim ; 
 the bastard of orlean with him is join 'd ; 
 reignier , duke of anjou , doth take hi part ; 
 the duke of alencon flieth to hi side . 
 exet . the dauphin crown king ! all fli to him ! 
 o , whither shall we fli from thi reproach ? 
 gloucest . we will not fli but to our enemi ' throat . 
 bedford , if thou be slack i 'll fight it out . 
 bedford . gloucest , whi doubt'st thou of my forward ? 
 an armi have i muster 'd in my thought , 
 wherewith alreadi franc is overrun . 
 
 enter a third messeng 
 
 third messeng . my graciou lord , to add to your 
 lament , 
 wherewith you now bedew king henri 's hears , 
 i must inform you of a dismal fight 
 betwixt the stout lord talbot and the french . 
 winchest . what ! wherein talbot overcam ? is't so ? 
 third messeng . o , no ; wherein lord talbot wa 
 o'erthrown . 
 the circumst i 'll tell you more at larg . 
 the tenth of august last thi dread lord , 
 retir from the sieg of orlean , 
 have full scarc six thousand in hi troop , 
 by three and twenti thousand of the french 
 wa round encompass and set upon . 
 no leisur had he to enrank hi men ; 
 he want pike to set befor hi archer ; 
 instead whereof sharp stake pluck 'd out of hedg 
 they pitch in the ground confusedli 
 to keep the horsemen off from break in . 
 more than three hour the fight continu ; 
 where valiant talbot , abov human thought , 
 enact wonder with hi sword and lanc : 
 hundr he sent to hell , and none durst stand him ; 
 here , there , and everywher , enrag 'd he slew 
 the french exclaim 'd the devil wa in arm ; 
 all the whole armi stood agaz 'd on him . 
 hi soldier , spi hi undaunt spirit , 
 ' a talbot ! a talbot ! ' cri out amain , 
 and rush 'd into the bowel of the battl . 
 here had the conquest fulli been seal 'd up 
 if sir john fastolf had not play 'd the coward . 
 he , be in the vaward plac 'd behind 
 with purpos to reliev and follow them- 
 cowardli fled , not have struck one stroke ; 
 henc grew the gener wreck and massacr . 
 enclos were they with their enemi . 
 a base walloon , to win the dauphin 's grace , 
 thrust talbot with a spear into the back ; 
 whom all franc , with their chief assembl strength , 
 durst not presum to look onc in the face . 
 bedford . is talbot slain ? then i will slay myself , 
 for live idli here in pomp and eas , 
 whilst such a worthi leader , want aid , 
 unto hi dastard foemen is betray 'd . 
 third messeng . o no , he live , but is took prison , 
 and lord scale with him , and lord hungerford ; 
 most of the rest slaughter 'd or took likewis . 
 bedford . hi ransom there is none but i shall pay . 
 i 'll hale the dauphin headlong from hi throne ; 
 hi crown shall be the ransom of my friend ; 
 four of their lord i 'll chang for one of our . 
 farewel , my master ; to my task will i ; 
 bonfir in franc forthwith i am to make 
 to keep our great saint georg 's feast withal . 
 ten thousand soldier with me i will take , 
 whose bloodi deed shall make an europ quak . 
 third messeng . so you had need ; for orlean is besieg 'd ; 
 the english armi is grown weak and faint ; 
 the earl of salisburi craveth suppli 
 and hardli keep hi men from mutini , 
 sinc they , so few , watch such a multitud . 
 exet . rememb , lord , your oath to henri sworn , 
 either to quell the dauphin utterli , 
 or bring him in obedi to your yoke . 
 bedford . i do rememb it , and here take my leav 
 to go about my prepar . exit 
 gloucest . i 'll to the tower with all the hast i can 
 to view th ' artilleri and munit ; 
 and then i will proclaim young henri king . exit 
 exet . to eltham will i , where the young king is , 
 be ordain 'd hi special governor ; 
 and for hi safeti there i 'll best devis . exit 
 winchest . [ asid ] each hath hi place and function to 
 attend : 
 i am left out ; for me noth remain . 
 but long i will not be jack out of offic . 
 the king from eltham i intend to steal , 
 and sit at chiefest stern of public weal . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 franc . befor orlean 
 
 sound a flourish . enter charl the dauphin , alencon , 
 and reignier , march with drum and soldier 
 
 charl . mar hi true move , even as in the heaven 
 so in the earth , to thi day is not known . 
 late did he shine upon the english side ; 
 now we are victor , upon us he smile . 
 what town of ani moment but we have ? 
 at pleasur here we lie near orlean ; 
 otherwhil the famish 'd english , like pale ghost , 
 faintli besieg us one hour in a month . 
 alencon . they want their porridg and their fat bull 
 beev . 
 either they must be diet like mule 
 and have their provend tie to their mouth , 
 or piteou they will look , like drown mice . 
 reignier . let 's rais the sieg . whi live we idli here ? 
 talbot is taken , whom we wont to fear ; 
 remaineth none but mad-brain 'd salisburi , 
 and he may well in fret spend hi gall 
 nor men nor money hath he to make war . 
 charl . sound , sound alarum ; we will rush on them . 
 now for the honour of the forlorn french ! 
 him i forgiv my death that killeth me , 
 when he see me go back one foot or flee . exeunt 
 
 here alarum . they are beaten hack by the english , with 
 great loss . re-ent charl , alencon , and reignier 
 
 charl . who ever saw the like ? what men have i ! 
 dog ! coward ! dastard ! i would ne'er have fled 
 but that they left me midst my enemi . 
 reignier . salisburi is a desper homicid ; 
 he fighteth as one weari of hi life . 
 the other lord , like lion want food , 
 do rush upon us as their hungri prey . 
 alencon . froissart , a countryman of our , record 
 england all oliv and rowland bred 
 dure the time edward the third did reign . 
 more truli now may thi be verifi ; 
 for none but samson and golias 
 it sendeth forth to skirmish . one to ten ! 
 lean raw-bon 'd rascal ! who would e'er suppos 
 they had such courag and audac ? 
 charl . let 's leav thi town ; for they are hare-brain 'd 
 slave , 
 and hunger will enforc them to be more eager . 
 of old i know them ; rather with their teeth 
 the wall they 'll tear down than forsak the sieg . 
 reignier . i think by some odd gimmer or devic 
 their arm are set , like clock , still to strike on ; 
 els ne'er could they hold out so as they do . 
 by my consent , we 'll even let them alon . 
 alencon . be it so . 
 
 enter the bastard of orlean 
 
 bastard . where 's the princ dauphin ? i have news for him . 
 charl . bastard of orlean , thrice welcom to us . 
 bastard . methink your look are sad , your cheer appal 'd . 
 hath the late overthrow wrought thi offenc ? 
 be not dismay 'd , for succour is at hand . 
 a holi maid hither with me i bring , 
 which , by a vision sent to her from heaven , 
 ordain is to rais thi tediou sieg 
 and drive the english forth the bound of franc . 
 the spirit of deep propheci she hath , 
 exceed the nine sibyl of old rome : 
 what 's past and what 's to come she can descri . 
 speak , shall i call her in ? believ my word , 
 for they are certain and unfal . 
 charl . go , call her in . [ exit bastard ] 
 but first , to tri her skill , 
 reignier , stand thou as dauphin in my place ; 
 question her proudli ; let thi look be stern ; 
 by thi mean shall we sound what skill she hath . 
 
 re-ent the bastard of orlean with 
 joan la pucel 
 
 reignier . fair maid , is 't thou wilt do these wondrou feat ? 
 pucel . reignier , is 't thou that thinkest to beguil me ? 
 where is the dauphin ? come , come from behind ; 
 i know thee well , though never seen befor . 
 be not amaz 'd , there 's noth hid from me . 
 in privat will i talk with thee apart . 
 stand back , you lord , and give us leav awhil . 
 reignier . she take upon her brave at first dash . 
 pucel . dauphin , i am by birth a shepherd 's daughter , 
 my wit untrain 'd in ani kind of art . 
 heaven and our ladi graciou hath it plea 'd 
 to shine on my contempt estat . 
 lo , whilst i wait on my tender lamb 
 and to sun 's parch heat display 'd my cheek , 
 god 's mother deign to appear to me , 
 and in a vision full of majesti 
 will 'd me to leav my base vocat 
 and free my countri from calam 
 her aid she promi 'd and assur 'd success . 
 in complet glori she reveal 'd herself ; 
 and wherea i wa black and swart befor , 
 with those clear ray which she infu 'd on me 
 that beauti am i bless 'd with which you may see . 
 ask me what question thou canst possibl , 
 and i will answer unpremedit . 
 my courag tri by combat if thou dar'st , 
 and thou shalt find that i exceed my sex . 
 resolv on thi : thou shalt be fortun 
 if thou receiv me for thi warlik mate . 
 charl . thou hast astonish 'd me with thi high term . 
 onli thi proof i 'll of thi valour make 
 in singl combat thou shalt buckl with me ; 
 and if thou vanquishest , thi word are true ; 
 otherwis i renounc all confid . 
 pucel . i am prepar 'd ; here is my keen-edg 'd sword , 
 deck 'd with five flower-de-luc on each side , 
 the which at tourain , in saint katherin 's churchyard , 
 out of a great deal of old iron i chose forth . 
 charl . then come , o ' god 's name ; i fear no woman . 
 pucel . and while i live i 'll ne'er fli from a man . 
 [ here they fight and joan la pucel overcom ] 
 charl . stay , stay thi hand ; thou art an amazon , 
 and fightest with the sword of deborah . 
 pucel . christ 's mother help me , els i were too weak . 
 charl . whoe'er help thee , 't is thou that must help me . 
 impati i burn with thi desir ; 
 my heart and hand thou hast at onc subdu 'd . 
 excel pucel , if thi name be so , 
 let me thi servant and not sovereign be . 
 't is the french dauphin sueth to thee thu . 
 pucel . i must not yield to ani rite of love , 
 for my profess 's sacr from abov . 
 when i have chase all thi foe from henc , 
 then will i think upon a recompens . 
 charl . meantim look graciou on thi prostrat thrall . 
 reignier . my lord , methink , is veri long in talk . 
 alencon . doubtless he shrive thi woman to her smock ; 
 els ne'er could he so long protract hi speech . 
 reignier . shall we disturb him , sinc he keep no mean ? 
 alencon . he may mean more than we poor men do know ; 
 these women are shrewd tempter with their tongu . 
 reignier . my lord , where are you ? what devis you on ? 
 shall we give o'er orlean , or no ? 
 pucel . whi , no , i say ; distrust recreant ! 
 fight till the last gasp ; i will be your guard . 
 charl . what she say i 'll confirm ; we 'll fight it out . 
 pucel . assign 'd am i to be the english scourg . 
 thi night the sieg assuredli i 'll rais . 
 expect saint martin 's summer , halcyon day , 
 sinc i have enter into these war . 
 glori is like a circl in the water , 
 which never ceaseth to enlarg itself 
 till by broad spread it dispers to nought . 
 with henri 's death the english circl end ; 
 dispers are the glori it includ . 
 now am i like that proud insult ship 
 which caesar and hi fortun bare at onc . 
 charl . wa mahomet inspir with a dove ? 
 thou with an eagl art inspir then . 
 helen , the mother of great constantin , 
 nor yet saint philip 's daughter were like thee . 
 bright star of venu , fall'n down on the earth , 
 how may i rever worship thee enough ? 
 alencon . leav off delay , and let us rais the sieg . 
 reignier . woman , do what thou canst to save our honour ; 
 drive them from orlean , and be immortaliz 'd . 
 charl . present we 'll tri . come , let 's away about it . 
 no prophet will i trust if she prove fals . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . befor the tower gate 
 
 enter the duke of gloucest , with hi serving-men 
 in blue coat 
 
 gloucest . i am come to survey the tower thi day ; 
 sinc henri 's death , i fear , there is convey . 
 where be these warder that they wait not here ? 
 open the gate ; 't is gloucest that call . 
 first warder . [ within ] who 's there that knock so 
 imperi ? 
 first serving-man . it is the nobl duke of gloucest . 
 second warder . [ within ] whoe'er he be , you may not be 
 let in . 
 first serving-man . villain , answer you so the lord 
 protector ? 
 first warder . [ within ] the lord protect him ! so we 
 answer him . 
 we do no otherwis than we are will 'd . 
 gloucest . who will you , or whose will stand but 
 mine ? 
 there 's none protector of the realm but i . 
 break up the gate , i 'll be your warrant . 
 shall i be flout thu by dunghil groom ? 
 [ gloucest 's men rush at the tower gate , and 
 woodvil the lieuten speak within ] 
 woodvil . [ within ] what nois is thi ? what traitor 
 have we here ? 
 gloucest . lieuten , is it you whose voic i hear ? 
 open the gate ; here 's gloucest that would enter . 
 woodvil . [ within ] have patienc , nobl duke , i may 
 not open ; 
 the cardin of winchest forbid . 
 from him i have express command 
 that thou nor none of thine shall be let in . 
 gloucest . faint-heart woodvil , prizest him fore me ? 
 arrog winchest , that haughti prelat 
 whom henri , our late sovereign , ne'er could brook ! 
 thou art no friend to god or to the king . 
 open the gate , or i 'll shut thee out shortli . 
 serving-men . open the gate unto the lord protector , 
 or we 'll burst them open , if that you come not quickli . 
 
 enter to the protector at the tower gate winchest 
 and hi men in tawni coat 
 
 winchest . how now , ambiti humphri ! what mean 
 thi ? 
 gloucest . peel 'd priest , dost thou command me to be 
 shut out ? 
 winchest . i do , thou most usurp proditor , 
 and not protector of the king or realm . 
 gloucest . stand back , thou manifest conspir , 
 thou that contrived'st to murder our dead lord ; 
 thou that giv'st whore indulg to sin . 
 i 'll canvass thee in thi broad cardin 's hat , 
 if thou proceed in thi thi insol . 
 winchest . nay , stand thou back ; i will not budg a foot . 
 thi be damascu ; be thou curs cain , 
 to slay thi brother abel , if thou wilt . 
 gloucest . i will not slay thee , but i 'll drive thee back . 
 thi scarlet robe as a child 's bearing-cloth 
 i 'll use to carri thee out of thi place . 
 winchest . do what thou dar'st ; i beard thee to thi face . 
 gloucest . what ! am i dar 'd and beard to my face ? 
 draw , men , for all thi privileg place 
 blue-coat to tawny-coat . priest , bewar your beard ; 
 i mean to tug it , and to cuff you soundli ; 
 under my feet i stamp thi cardin 's hat ; 
 in spite of pope or digniti of church , 
 here by the cheek i 'll drag thee up and down . 
 winchest . gloucest , thou wilt answer thi befor the 
 pope . 
 gloucest . winchest goos ! i cri ' a rope , a rope ! ' 
 now beat them henc ; whi do you let them stay ? 
 thee i 'll chase henc , thou wolf in sheep 's array . 
 out , tawny-coat ! out , scarlet hypocrit ! 
 
 here gloucest 's men beat out the cardin 's 
 men ; and enter in the hurli burli the mayor of 
 london and hi offic 
 
 mayor . fie , lord ! that you , be suprem magistr , 
 thu contumeli should break the peac ! 
 gloucest . peac , mayor ! thou know'st littl of my wrong : 
 here 's beaufort , that regard nor god nor king , 
 hath here distrain 'd the tower to hi use . 
 winchest . here 's gloucest , a foe to citizen ; 
 one that still motion war and never peac , 
 o'ercharg your free purs with larg fine ; 
 that seek to overthrow religion , 
 becaus he is protector of the realm , 
 and would have armour here out of the tower , 
 to crown himself king and suppress the princ . 
 gloucest . i will not answer thee with word , but blow . 
 [ here they skirmish again ] 
 mayor . nought rest for me in thi tumultu strife 
 but to make open proclam . 
 come , offic , as loud as e'er thou canst , 
 cri . 
 offic . [ cri ] all manner of men assembl here in arm 
 thi day against god 's peac and the king 's , we charg 
 and command you , in hi high ' name , to repair to 
 your sever dwelling-plac ; and not to wear , handl , or 
 use , ani sword , weapon , or dagger , henceforward , upon 
 pain of death . 
 gloucest . cardin , i 'll be no breaker of the law ; 
 but we shall meet and break our mind at larg . 
 winchest . gloucest , we 'll meet to thi cost , be sure ; 
 thi heart-blood i will have for thi day 's work . 
 mayor . i 'll call for club if you will not away . 
 thi cardin 's more haughti than the devil . 
 gloucest . mayor , farewel ; thou dost but what thou 
 mayst . 
 winchest . abomin gloucest , guard thi head , 
 for i intend to have it ere long . 
 exeunt , sever , gloucest and winchest 
 with their servant 
 mayor . see the coast clear 'd , and then we will depart . 
 good god , these nobl should such stomach bear ! 
 i myself fight not onc in forti year . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 franc . befor orlean 
 
 enter , on the wall , the master-gunn 
 of orlean and hi boy 
 
 master-gunn . sirrah , thou know'st how orlean is 
 besieg 'd , 
 and how the english have the suburb won . 
 boy . father , i know ; and oft have shot at them , 
 howe' unfortun i miss 'd my aim . 
 master-gunn . but now thou shalt not . be thou rul 'd 
 by me . 
 chief master-gunn am i of thi town ; 
 someth i must do to procur me grace . 
 the princ 's espial have inform me 
 how the english , in the suburb close intrench 'd , 
 wont , through a secret grate of iron bar 
 in yonder tower , to overp the citi , 
 and thenc discov how with most advantag 
 they may vex us with shot or with assault . 
 to intercept thi inconveni , 
 a piec of ordnanc 'gainst it i have plac 'd ; 
 and even these three day have i watch 'd 
 if i could see them . now do thou watch , 
 for i can stay no longer . 
 if thou spy'st ani , run and bring me word ; 
 and thou shalt find me at the governor 's . exit 
 boy . father , i warrant you ; take you no care ; 
 i 'll never troubl you , if i may spi them . exit 
 
 enter salisburi and talbot on the turret , with 
 sir william glansdal , sir thoma gargrav , 
 and other 
 
 salisburi . talbot , my life , my joy , again return 'd ! 
 how wert thou handl be prison ? 
 or by what mean got'st thou to be relea 'd ? 
 discours , i prithe , on thi turret 's top . 
 talbot . the earl of bedford had a prison 
 call 'd the brave lord ponton de santrail ; 
 for him wa i exchang 'd and ransom . 
 but with a baser man of arm by far 
 onc , in contempt , they would have barter 'd me ; 
 which i disdain scorn 'd , and crave death 
 rather than i would be so vile esteem 'd . 
 in fine , redeem 'd i wa as i desir 'd . 
 but , o ! the treacher fastolf wound my heart 
 whom with my bare fist i would execut , 
 if i now had him brought into my power . 
 salisburi . yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertain 'd . 
 talbot . with scoff , and scorn , and contumeli taunt , 
 in open market-plac produc 'd they me 
 to be a public spectacl to all ; 
 here , said they , is the terror of the french , 
 the scarecrow that affright our children so . 
 then broke i from the offic that led me , 
 and with my nail digg 'd stone out of the ground 
 to hurl at the behold of my shame ; 
 my grisli counten made other fli ; 
 none durst come near for fear of sudden death . 
 in iron wall they deem 'd me not secur ; 
 so great fear of my name 'mongst them wa spread 
 that they suppo 'd i could rend bar of steel 
 and spurn in piec post of adam ; 
 wherefor a guard of chosen shot i had 
 that walk 'd about me everi minute-whil ; 
 and if i did but stir out of my bed , 
 readi they were to shoot me to the heart . 
 
 enter the boy with a linstock 
 
 salisburi . i griev to hear what torment you endur 'd ; 
 but we will be reveng 'd suffici . 
 now it is supper-tim in orlean : 
 here , through thi grate , i count each one 
 and view the frenchmen how they fortifi . 
 let us look in ; the sight will much delight thee . 
 sir thoma gargrav and sir william glansdal , 
 let me have your express opinion 
 where is best place to make our batt'ri next . 
 gargrav . i think at the north gate ; for there stand lord . 
 glansdal . and i here , at the bulwark of the bridg . 
 talbot . for aught i see , thi citi must be famish 'd , 
 or with light skirmish enfeebl . 
 [ here they shoot and salisburi and gargrav 
 fall down ] 
 salisburi . o lord , have merci on us , wretch sinner ! 
 gargrav . o lord , have merci on me , woeful man ! 
 talbot . what chanc is thi that suddenli hath cross 'd us ? 
 speak , salisburi ; at least , if thou canst speak . 
 how far'st thou , mirror of all martial men ? 
 one of thi eye and thi cheek 's side struck off ! 
 accurs tower ! accurs fatal hand 
 that hath contriv 'd thi woeful tragedi ! 
 in thirteen battl salisburi o'ercam ; 
 henri the fifth he first train 'd to the war ; 
 whilst ani trump did sound or drum struck up , 
 hi sword did ne'er leav strike in the field . 
 yet liv'st thou , salisburi ? though thi speech doth fail , 
 one eye thou hast to look to heaven for grace ; 
 the sun with one eye vieweth all the world . 
 heaven , be thou graciou to none aliv 
 if salisburi want merci at thi hand ! 
 bear henc hi bodi ; i will help to buri it . 
 sir thoma gargrav , hast thou ani life ? 
 speak unto talbot ; nay , look up to him . 
 salisburi , cheer thi spirit with thi comfort , 
 thou shalt not die while 
 he beckon with hi hand and smile on me , 
 as who should say 'when i am dead and gone , 
 rememb to aveng me on the french . ' 
 plantagenet , i will ; and like thee , nero , 
 play on the lute , behold the town burn . 
 wretch shall franc be onli in my name . 
 [ here an alarum , and it thunder and lighten ] 
 what stir is thi ? what tumult 's in the heaven ? 
 whenc cometh thi alarum and the nois ? 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . my lord , my lord , the french have gather 'd 
 head 
 the dauphin , with one joan la pucel join 'd , 
 a holi prophetess new risen up , 
 is come with a great power to rais the sieg . 
 [ here salisburi lifteth himself up and groan ] 
 talbot . hear , hear how die salisburi doth groan . 
 it irk hi heart he can not be reveng 'd . 
 frenchmen , i 'll be a salisburi to you . 
 pucel or puzzel , dolphin or dogfish , 
 your heart i 'll stamp out with my hors 's heel 
 and make a quagmir of your mingl brain . 
 convey me salisburi into hi tent , 
 and then we 'll tri what these dastard frenchmen dare . 
 alarum . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 befor orlean 
 
 here an alarum again , and talbot pursueth the 
 dauphin and driveth him . then enter joan la pucel 
 drive englishmen befor her . then enter talbot 
 
 talbot . where is my strength , my valour , and my forc ? 
 our english troop retir , i can not stay them ; 
 a woman clad in armour chaseth them . 
 
 enter la pucel 
 
 here , here she come . i 'll have a bout with thee . 
 devil or devil 's dam , i 'll conjur thee ; 
 blood will i draw on thee-thou art a witch 
 and straightway give thi soul to him thou serv'st . 
 pucel . come , come , 't is onli i that must disgrac thee . 
 [ here they fight ] 
 talbot . heaven , can you suffer hell so to prevail ? 
 my breast i 'll burst with strain of my courag . 
 and from my shoulder crack my arm asund , 
 but i will chastis thi high mind strumpet . 
 [ they fight again ] 
 pucel . talbot , farewel ; thi hour is not yet come . 
 i must go victual orlean forthwith . 
 [ a short alarum ; then enter the town with soldier ] 
 o'ertak me if thou canst ; i scorn thi strength . 
 go , go , cheer up thi hungri starv men ; 
 help salisburi to make hi testament . 
 thi day is our , as mani more shall be . exit 
 talbot . my thought are whirl like a potter 's wheel ; 
 i know not where i am nor what i do . 
 a witch by fear , not forc , like hannib , 
 drive back our troop and conquer as she list . 
 so bee with smoke and dove with noisom stench 
 are from their hive and hous driven away . 
 they call 'd us , for our fierc , english dog ; 
 now like to whelp we cri run away . 
 [ a short alarum ] 
 hark , countrymen ! either renew the fight 
 or tear the lion out of england 's coat ; 
 renounc your soil , give sheep in lion ' stead : 
 sheep run not half so treacher from the wolf , 
 or hors or oxen from the leopard , 
 as you fli from your oft subdu slave . 
 [ alarum . here anoth skirmish ] 
 it will not be-retir into your trench . 
 you all consent unto salisburi 's death , 
 for none would strike a stroke in hi reveng . 
 pucel is ent'r into orlean 
 in spite of us or aught that we could do . 
 o , would i were to die with salisburi ! 
 the shame hereof will make me hide my head . 
 exit talbot . alarum ; retreat 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 orlean 
 
 flourish . enter on the wall , la pucel , charl , 
 reignier , alencon , and soldier 
 
 pucel . advanc our wave colour on the wall ; 
 rescu 'd is orlean from the english . 
 thu joan la pucel hath perform 'd her word . 
 charl . divinest creatur , astraea 's daughter , 
 how shall i honour thee for thi success ? 
 thi promis are like adoni ' garden , 
 that one day bloom 'd and fruit were the next . 
 franc , triumph in thi gloriou prophetess . 
 recov 'd is the town of orlean . 
 more bless hap did ne'er befal our state . 
 reignier . whi ring not out the bell aloud throughout the 
 town ? 
 dauphin , command the citizen make bonfir 
 and feast and banquet in the open street 
 to celebr the joy that god hath given us . 
 alencon . all franc will be replet with mirth and joy 
 when they shall hear how we have play 'd the men . 
 charl . 't is joan , not we , by whom the day is won ; 
 for which i will divid my crown with her ; 
 and all the priest and friar in my realm 
 shall in process sing her endless prais . 
 a stateli pyrami to her i 'll rear 
 than rhodop 's of memphi ever wa . 
 in memori of her , when she is dead , 
 her ash , in an urn more preciou 
 than the rich jewel 'd coffer of dariu , 
 transport shall be at high festiv 
 befor the king and queen of franc . 
 no longer on saint deni will we cri , 
 but joan la pucel shall be franc 's saint . 
 come in , and let us banquet royal 
 after thi golden day of victori . flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 befor orlean 
 
 enter a french sergeant and two sentinel 
 
 sergeant . sir , take your place and be vigil . 
 if ani nois or soldier you perceiv 
 near to the wall , by some appar sign 
 let us have knowledg at the court of guard . 
 first sentinel . sergeant , you shall . [ exit sergeant ] 
 thu are poor servitor , 
 when other sleep upon their quiet bed , 
 constrain 'd to watch in dark , rain , and cold . 
 
 enter talbot , bedford , burgundi , and forc , 
 with scaling-ladd ; their drum beat a dead 
 march 
 
 talbot . lord regent , and redoubt burgundi , 
 by whose approach the region of artoi , 
 wallon , and picardi , are friend to us , 
 thi happi night the frenchmen are secur , 
 have all day carou 'd and banquet ; 
 embrac we then thi opportun , 
 as fit best to quittanc their deceit , 
 contriv 'd by art and bale sorceri . 
 bedford . coward of franc , how much he wrong hi fame , 
 despair of hi own arm 's fortitud , 
 to join with witch and the help of hell ! 
 burgundi . traitor have never other compani . 
 but what 's that pucel whom they term so pure ? 
 talbot . a maid , they say . 
 bedford . a maid ! and be so martial ! 
 burgundi . pray god she prove not masculin ere long , 
 if underneath the standard of the french 
 she carri armour as she hath begun . 
 talbot . well , let them practis and convers with spirit : 
 god is our fortress , in whose conquer name 
 let us resolv to scale their flinti bulwark . 
 bedford . ascend , brave talbot ; we will follow thee . 
 talbot . not all togeth ; better far , i guess , 
 that we do make our entranc sever way ; 
 that if it chanc the one of us do fail 
 the other yet may rise against their forc . 
 bedford . agre ; i 'll to yond corner . 
 burgundi . and i to thi . 
 talbot . and here will talbot mount or make hi grave . 
 now , salisburi , for thee , and for the right 
 of english henri , shall thi night appear 
 how much in duti i am bound to both . 
 [ the english scale the wall and cri 'saint georg ! 
 a talbot ! ' ] 
 sentinel . arm ! arm ! the enemi doth make assault . 
 
 the french leap o'er the wall in their shirt . 
 enter , sever way , bastard , alencon , reignier , 
 half readi and half unreadi 
 
 alencon . how now , my lord ? what , all unreadi so ? 
 bastard . unreadi ! ay , and glad we 'scap 'd so well . 
 reignier . 't wa time , i trow , to wake and leav our bed , 
 hear alarum at our chamber door . 
 alencon . of all exploit sinc first i follow 'd arm 
 ne'er heard i of a warlik enterpris 
 more ventur or desper than thi . 
 bastard . i think thi talbot be a fiend of hell . 
 reignier . if not of hell , the heaven , sure , favour him 
 alencon . here cometh charl ; i marvel how he sped . 
 
 enter charl and la pucel 
 
 bastard . tut ! holi joan wa hi defens guard . 
 charl . is thi thi cun , thou deceit dame ? 
 didst thou at first , to flatter us withal , 
 make us partak of a littl gain 
 that now our loss might be ten time so much ? 
 pucel . wherefor is charl impati with hi friend ? 
 at all time will you have my power alik ? 
 sleep or wake , must i still prevail 
 or will you blame and lay the fault on me ? 
 improvid soldier ! had your watch been good 
 thi sudden mischief never could have fall'n . 
 charl . duke of alencon , thi wa your default 
 that , be captain of the watch to-night , 
 did look no better to that weighti charg . 
 alencon . had all your quarter been as safe kept 
 as that whereof i had the govern , 
 we had not been thu shame surpri 'd . 
 bastard . mine wa secur . 
 reignier . and so wa mine , my lord . 
 charl . and , for myself , most part of all thi night , 
 within her quarter and mine own precinct 
 i wa employ 'd in pass to and fro 
 about reliev of the sentinel . 
 then how or which way should they first break in ? 
 pucel . question , my lord , no further of the case , 
 how or which way ; 't is sure they found some place 
 but weakli guard , where the breach wa made . 
 and now there rest no other shift but thi 
 to gather our soldier , scatter 'd and disper 'd , 
 and lay new platform to endamag them . 
 
 alarum . enter an english soldier , cri 
 ' a talbot ! a talbot ! ' they fli , leav their 
 cloth behind 
 
 soldier . i 'll be so bold to take what they have left . 
 the cri of talbot serv me for a sword ; 
 for i have loaden me with mani spoil , 
 use no other weapon but hi name . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 orlean . within the town 
 
 enter talbot , bedford , burgundi , a captain , 
 and other 
 
 bedford . the day begin to break , and night is fled 
 whose pitchi mantl over-veil 'd the earth . 
 here sound retreat and ceas our hot pursuit . 
 [ retreat sound ] 
 talbot . bring forth the bodi of old salisburi 
 and here advanc it in the market-plac , 
 the middl centr of thi curs town . 
 now have i paid my vow unto hi soul ; 
 for everi drop of blood wa drawn from him 
 there hath at least five frenchmen die to-night . 
 and that hereaft age may behold 
 what ruin happen in reveng of him , 
 within their chiefest templ i 'll erect 
 a tomb , wherein hi corps shall be interr 'd ; 
 upon the which , that everi one may read , 
 shall be engrav 'd the sack of orlean , 
 the treacher manner of hi mourn death , 
 and what a terror he had been to franc . 
 but , lord , in all our bloodi massacr , 
 i muse we met not with the dauphin 's grace , 
 hi new-com champion , virtuou joan of arc , 
 nor ani of hi fals confeder . 
 bedford . 't is thought , lord talbot , when the fight began , 
 rou 'd on the sudden from their drowsi bed , 
 they did amongst the troop of arm men 
 leap o'er the wall for refug in the field . 
 burgundi . myself , as far as i could well discern 
 for smoke and duski vapour of the night , 
 am sure i scar 'd the dauphin and hi trull , 
 when arm in arm they both came swiftli run , 
 like to a pair of love turtle-dov 
 that could not live asund day or night . 
 after that thing are set in order here , 
 we 'll follow them with all the power we have . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . all hail , my lord ! which of thi princ train 
 call ye the warlik talbot , for hi act 
 so much applaud through the realm of franc ? 
 talbot . here is the talbot ; who would speak with him ? 
 messeng . the virtuou ladi , countess of auvergn , 
 with modesti admir thi renown , 
 by me entreat , great lord , thou wouldst vouchsaf 
 to visit her poor castl where she lie , 
 that she may boast she hath beheld the man 
 whose glori fill the world with loud report . 
 burgundi . is it even so ? nay , then i see our war 
 will turn into a peac comic sport , 
 when ladi crave to be encount'r with . 
 you may not , my lord , despis her gentl suit . 
 talbot . ne'er trust me then ; for when a world of men 
 could not prevail with all their oratori , 
 yet hath a woman 's kind overrul 'd ; 
 and therefor tell her i return great thank 
 and in submiss will attend on her . 
 will not your honour bear me compani ? 
 bedford . no , truli ; 't is more than manner will ; 
 and i have heard it said unbidden guest 
 are often welcomest when they are gone . 
 talbot . well then , alon , sinc there 's no remedi , 
 i mean to prove thi ladi 's courtesi . 
 come hither , captain . [ whisper ] you perceiv my mind ? 
 captain . i do , my lord , and mean accordingli . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 auvergn . the castl 
 
 enter the countess and her porter 
 
 countess . porter , rememb what i gave in charg ; 
 and when you have done so , bring the key to me . 
 porter . madam , i will . 
 countess . the plot is laid ; if all thing fall out right , 
 i shall as famou be by thi exploit . 
 as scythian tomyri by cyru ' death . 
 great is the rumour of thi dread knight , 
 and hi achiev of no less account . 
 fain would mine eye be wit with mine ear 
 to give their censur of these rare report . 
 
 enter messeng and talbot . 
 
 messeng . madam , accord as your ladyship desir 'd , 
 by messag crav 'd , so is lord talbot come . 
 countess . and he is welcom . what ! is thi the man ? 
 messeng . madam , it is . 
 countess . is thi the scourg of franc ? 
 is thi talbot , so much fear 'd abroad 
 that with hi name the mother still their babe ? 
 i see report is fabul and fals . 
 i thought i should have seen some hercul , 
 a second hector , for hi grim aspect 
 and larg proport of hi strong-knit limb . 
 ala , thi is a child , a silli dwarf ! 
 it can not be thi weak and writhl shrimp 
 should strike such terror to hi enemi . 
 talbot . madam , i have been bold to troubl you ; 
 but sinc your ladyship is not at leisur , 
 i 'll sort some other time to visit you . [ go ] 
 countess . what mean he now ? go ask him whither he 
 goe . 
 messeng . stay , my lord talbot ; for my ladi crave 
 to know the caus of your abrupt departur . 
 talbot . marri , for that she 's in a wrong belief , 
 i go to certifi her talbot 's here . 
 
 re-ent porter with key 
 
 countess . if thou be he , then art thou prison . 
 talbot . prison ! to whom ? 
 countess . to me , blood-thirsti lord 
 and for that caus i train 'd thee to my hous . 
 long time thi shadow hath been thrall to me , 
 for in my galleri thi pictur hang ; 
 but now the substanc shall endur the like 
 and i will chain these leg and arm of thine 
 that hast by tyranni these mani year 
 wast our countri , slain our citizen , 
 and sent our son and husband captiv . 
 talbot . ha , ha , ha ! 
 countess . laughest thou , wretch ? thi mirth shall turn to 
 moan . 
 talbot . i laugh to see your ladyship so fond 
 to think that you have aught but talbot 's shadow 
 whereon to practis your sever . 
 countess . whi , art not thou the man ? 
 talbot . i am inde . 
 countess . then have i substanc too . 
 talbot . no , no , i am but shadow of myself . 
 you are deceiv 'd , my substanc is not here ; 
 for what you see is but the smallest part 
 and least proport of human . 
 i tell you , madam , were the whole frame here , 
 it is of such a spaciou lofti pitch 
 your roof were not suffici to contain 't . 
 countess . thi is a riddl merchant for the nonc ; 
 he will be here , and yet he is not here . 
 how can these contrarieti agre ? 
 talbot . that will i show you present . 
 
 wind hi horn ; drum strike up ; 
 a peal of ordnanc . enter soldier 
 
 how say you , madam ? are you now persuad 
 that talbot is but shadow of himself ? 
 these are hi substanc , sinew , arm , and strength , 
 with which he yoketh your rebelli neck , 
 razeth your citi , and subvert your town , 
 and in a moment make them desol . 
 countess . victori talbot ! pardon my abus . 
 i find thou art no less than fame hath bruit , 
 and more than may be gather by thi shape . 
 let my presumpt not provok thi wrath , 
 for i am sorri that with rever 
 i did not entertain thee as thou art . 
 talbot . be not dismay 'd , fair ladi ; nor misconst 
 the mind of talbot as you did mistak 
 the outward composit of hi bodi . 
 what you have done hath not offend me . 
 nor other satisfact do i crave 
 but onli , with your patienc , that we may 
 tast of your wine and see what cate you have , 
 for soldier ' stomach alway serv them well . 
 countess . with all my heart , and think me honour 
 to feast so great a warrior in my hous . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the templ garden 
 
 enter the earl of somerset , suffolk , and warwick ; 
 richard plantagenet , vernon , and anoth lawyer 
 
 plantagenet . great lord and gentlemen , what mean thi 
 silenc ? 
 dare no man answer in a case of truth ? 
 suffolk . within the templ hall we were too loud ; 
 the garden here is more conveni . 
 plantagenet . then say at onc if i maintain 'd the truth ; 
 or els wa wrangl somerset in th ' error ? 
 suffolk . faith , i have been a truant in the law 
 and never yet could frame my will to it ; 
 and therefor frame the law unto my will . 
 somerset . judg you , my lord of warwick , then , between us . 
 warwick . between two hawk , which fli the higher pitch ; 
 between two dog , which hath the deeper mouth ; 
 between two blade , which bear the better temper ; 
 between two hors , which doth bear him best ; 
 between two girl , which hath the merriest eye 
 i have perhap some shallow spirit of judgment ; 
 but in these nice sharp quillet of the law , 
 good faith , i am no wiser than a daw . 
 plantagenet . tut , tut , here is a mannerli forbear : 
 the truth appear so nake on my side 
 that ani purblind eye may find it out . 
 somerset . and on my side it is so well apparel 'd , 
 so clear , so shine , and so evid , 
 that it will glimmer through a blind man 's eye . 
 plantagenet . sinc you are tongue-ti and so loath to speak , 
 in dumb signific proclaim your thought . 
 let him that is a true-born gentleman 
 and stand upon the honour of hi birth , 
 if he suppos that i have plead truth , 
 from off thi brier pluck a white rose with me . 
 somerset . let him that is no coward nor no flatter , 
 but dare maintain the parti of the truth , 
 pluck a red rose from off thi thorn with me . 
 warwick . i love no colour ; and , without all colour 
 of base insinu flatteri , 
 i pluck thi white rose with plantagenet . 
 suffolk . i pluck thi red rose with young somerset , 
 and say withal i think he held the right . 
 vernon . stay , lord and gentlemen , and pluck no more 
 till you conclud that he upon whose side 
 the fewest rose are cropp 'd from the tree 
 shall yield the other in the right opinion . 
 somerset . good master vernon , it is well object ; 
 if i have fewest , i subscrib in silenc . 
 plantagenet . and i . 
 vernon . then , for the truth and plain of the case , 
 i pluck thi pale and maiden blossom here , 
 give my verdict on the white rose side . 
 somerset . prick not your finger as you pluck it off , 
 lest , bleed , you do paint the white rose red , 
 and fall on my side so , against your will . 
 vernon . if i , my lord , for my opinion bleed , 
 opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt 
 and keep me on the side where still i am . 
 somerset . well , well , come on ; who els ? 
 lawyer . [ to somerset ] unless my studi and my book be 
 fals , 
 the argument you held wa wrong in you ; 
 in sign whereof i pluck a white rose too . 
 plantagenet . now , somerset , where is your argument ? 
 somerset . here in my scabbard , medit that 
 shall dye your white rose in a bloodi red . 
 plantagenet . meantim your cheek do counterfeit our 
 rose ; 
 for pale they look with fear , as wit 
 the truth on our side . 
 somerset . no , plantagenet , 
 't is not for fear but anger that thi cheek 
 blush for pure shame to counterfeit our rose , 
 and yet thi tongu will not confess thi error . 
 plantagenet . hath not thi rose a canker , somerset ? 
 somerset . hath not thi rose a thorn , plantagenet ? 
 plantagenet . ay , sharp and pierc , to maintain hi truth ; 
 while thi consum canker eat hi falsehood . 
 somerset . well , i 'll find friend to wear my bleed rose , 
 that shall maintain what i have said is true , 
 where fals plantagenet dare not be seen . 
 plantagenet . now , by thi maiden blossom in my hand , 
 i scorn thee and thi fashion , peevish boy . 
 suffolk . turn not thi scorn thi way , plantagenet . 
 plantagenet . proud pole , i will , and scorn both him and 
 thee . 
 suffolk . i 'll turn my part thereof into thi throat . 
 somerset . away , away , good william de la pole ! 
 we grace the yeoman by convers with him . 
 warwick . now , by god 's will , thou wrong'st him , somerset ; 
 hi grandfath wa lionel duke of clarenc , 
 third son to the third edward , king of england . 
 spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root ? 
 plantagenet . he bear him on the place 's privileg , 
 or durst not for hi craven heart say thu . 
 somerset . by him that made me , i 'll maintain my word 
 on ani plot of ground in christendom . 
 wa not thi father , richard earl of cambridg , 
 for treason execut in our late king 's day ? 
 and by hi treason stand'st not thou attaint , 
 corrupt , and exempt from ancient gentri ? 
 hi trespass yet live guilti in thi blood ; 
 and till thou be restor 'd thou art a yeoman . 
 plantagenet . my father wa attach , not attaint ; 
 condemn 'd to die for treason , but no traitor ; 
 and that i 'll prove on better men than somerset , 
 were grow time onc ripen to my will . 
 for your partak pole , and you yourself , 
 i 'll note you in my book of memori 
 to scourg you for thi apprehens . 
 look to it well , and say you are well warn 'd . 
 somerset . ay , thou shalt find us readi for thee still ; 
 and know us by these colour for thi foe 
 for these my friend in spite of thee shall wear . 
 plantagenet . and , by my soul , thi pale and angri rose , 
 as cogniz of my blood-drink hate , 
 will i for ever , and my faction , wear , 
 until it wither with me to my grave , 
 or flourish to the height of my degre . 
 suffolk . go forward , and be chok 'd with thi ambit ! 
 and so farewel until i meet thee next . exit 
 somerset . have with thee , pole . farewel , ambiti 
 richard . exit 
 plantagenet . how i am brav 'd , and must perforc endur 
 it ! 
 warwick . thi blot that they object against your hous 
 shall be wip 'd out in the next parliament , 
 call 'd for the truce of winchest and gloucest ; 
 and if thou be not then creat york , 
 i will not live to be account warwick . 
 meantim , in signal of my love to thee , 
 against proud somerset and william pole , 
 will i upon thi parti wear thi rose ; 
 and here i prophesi : thi brawl to-day , 
 grown to thi faction in the templ garden , 
 shall send between the red rose and the white 
 a thousand soul to death and deadli night . 
 plantagenet . good master vernon , i am bound to you 
 that you on my behalf would pluck a flower . 
 vernon . in your behalf still will i wear the same . 
 lawyer . and so will i . 
 plantagenet . thank , gentl sir . 
 come , let us four to dinner . i dare say 
 thi quarrel will drink blood anoth day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the tower of london 
 
 enter mortim , brought in a chair , and gaoler 
 
 mortim . kind keeper of my weak decay age , 
 let die mortim here rest himself . 
 even like a man new hale from the rack , 
 so fare my limb with long imprison ; 
 and these grey lock , the pursuiv of death , 
 nestor-lik age in an age of care , 
 argu the end of edmund mortim . 
 these eye , like lamp whose wast oil is spent , 
 wax dim , as draw to their exig ; 
 weak shoulder , overborn with burden grief , 
 and pithless arm , like to a wither vine 
 that droop hi sapless branch to the ground . 
 yet are these feet , whose strengthless stay is numb , 
 unabl to support thi lump of clay , 
 swift-wing with desir to get a grave , 
 as wit i no other comfort have . 
 but tell me , keeper , will my nephew come ? 
 first keeper . richard plantagenet , my lord , will come . 
 we sent unto the templ , unto hi chamber ; 
 and answer wa return 'd that he will come . 
 mortim . enough ; my soul shall then be satisfi . 
 poor gentleman ! hi wrong doth equal mine . 
 sinc henri monmouth first began to reign , 
 befor whose glori i wa great in arm , 
 thi loathsom sequestr have i had ; 
 and even sinc then hath richard been obscur 'd , 
 depriv 'd of honour and inherit . 
 but now the arbitr of despair , 
 just death , kind umpir of men 's miseri , 
 with sweet enlarg doth dismiss me henc . 
 i would hi troubl likewis were expir 'd , 
 that so he might recov what wa lost . 
 
 enter richard plantagenet 
 
 first keeper . my lord , your love nephew now is come . 
 mortim . richard plantagenet , my friend , is he come ? 
 plantagenet . ay , nobl uncl , thu ignobl us 'd , 
 your nephew , late despis richard , come . 
 mortim . direct mine arm i may embrac hi neck 
 and in hi bosom spend my latter gasp . 
 o , tell me when my lip do touch hi cheek , 
 that i may kindli give one faint kiss . 
 and now declar , sweet stem from york 's great stock , 
 whi didst thou say of late thou wert despi 'd ? 
 plantagenet . first , lean thine age back against mine arm ; 
 and , in that eas , i 'll tell thee my diseas . 
 thi day , in argument upon a case , 
 some word there grew 'twixt somerset and me ; 
 among which term he us 'd hi lavish tongu 
 and did upbraid me with my father 's death ; 
 which obloquy set bar befor my tongu , 
 els with the like i had requit him . 
 therefor , good uncl , for my father 's sake , 
 in honour of a true plantagenet , 
 and for allianc sake , declar the caus 
 my father , earl of cambridg , lost hi head . 
 mortim . that caus , fair nephew , that imprison 'd me 
 and hath detain 'd me all my flow'r youth 
 within a loathsom dungeon , there to pine , 
 wa curs instrument of hi deceas . 
 plantagenet . discov more at larg what caus that wa , 
 for i am ignor and can not guess . 
 mortim . i will , if that my fade breath permit 
 and death approach not ere my tale be done . 
 henri the fourth , grandfath to thi king , 
 depo 'd hi nephew richard , edward 's son , 
 the first-begotten and the law heir 
 of edward king , the third of that descent ; 
 dure whose reign the perci of the north , 
 find hi usurp most unjust , 
 endeavour 'd my advanc to the throne . 
 the reason mov 'd these warlik lord to thi 
 wa , for that-young richard thu remov 'd , 
 leav no heir begotten of hi body- 
 i wa the next by birth and parentag ; 
 for by my mother i deriv am 
 from lionel duke of clarenc , third son 
 to king edward the third ; wherea he 
 from john of gaunt doth bring hi pedigre , 
 be but fourth of that heroic line . 
 but mark : as in thi haughti great attempt 
 they labour to plant the right heir , 
 i lost my liberti , and they their live . 
 long after thi , when henri the fifth , 
 succeed hi father bolingbrok , did reign , 
 thi father , earl of cambridg , then deriv 'd 
 from famou edmund langley , duke of york , 
 marri my sister , that thi mother wa , 
 again , in piti of my hard distress , 
 levi an armi , ween to redeem 
 and have instal 'd me in the diadem ; 
 but , as the rest , so fell that nobl earl , 
 and wa behead . thu the mortim , 
 in whom the titl rest , were suppress 'd . 
 plantagenet . of which , my lord , your honour is the last . 
 mortim . true ; and thou seest that i no issu have , 
 and that my faint word do warrant death . 
 thou art my heir ; the rest i wish thee gather ; 
 but yet be wari in thi studiou care . 
 plantagenet . thi grave admonish prevail with me . 
 but yet methink my father 's execut 
 wa noth less than bloodi tyranni . 
 mortim . with silenc , nephew , be thou polit ; 
 strong fix is the hous of lancast 
 and like a mountain not to be remov 'd . 
 but now thi uncl is remov henc , 
 as princ do their court when they are cloy 'd 
 with long continu in a settl place . 
 plantagenet . o uncl , would some part of my young year 
 might but redeem the passag of your age ! 
 mortim . thou dost then wrong me , as that slaughter 
 doth 
 which giveth mani wound when one will kill . 
 mourn not , except thou sorrow for my good ; 
 onli give order for my funer . 
 and so , farewel ; and fair be all thi hope , 
 and prosper be thi life in peac and war ! [ die ] 
 plantagenet . and peac , no war , befal thi part soul ! 
 in prison hast thou spent a pilgrimag , 
 and like a hermit overpass 'd thi day . 
 well , i will lock hi counsel in my breast ; 
 and what i do imagin , let that rest . 
 keeper , convey him henc ; and i myself 
 will see hi burial better than hi life . 
 exeunt gaoler , hear out the bodi of mortim 
 here die the duski torch of mortim , 
 chok 'd with ambit of the meaner sort ; 
 and for those wrong , those bitter injuri , 
 which somerset hath offer 'd to my hous , 
 i doubt not but with honour to redress ; 
 and therefor hast i to the parliament , 
 either to be restor to my blood , 
 or make my ill th ' advantag of my good . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene < num > . 
 
 london . the parliament hous 
 
 flourish . enter the king , exet , gloucest , warwick , somerset , and suffolk ; 
 the bishop of winchest , richard plantagenet , and other . 
 gloucest offer to put up a bill ; winchest snatch it , and tear it 
 
 winchest . com'st thou with deep premedit line , 
 with written pamphlet studious devi 'd ? 
 humphrey of gloucest , if thou canst accus 
 or aught intend'st to lay unto my charg , 
 do it without invent , suddenli ; 
 i with sudden and extempor speech 
 purpos to answer what thou canst object . 
 gloucest . presumptu priest , thi place command my 
 patienc , 
 or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour 'd me . 
 think not , although in write i preferr 'd 
 the manner of thi vile outrag crime , 
 that therefor i have forg 'd , or am not abl 
 verbatim to rehears the method of my pen . 
 no , prelat ; such is thi audaci wicked , 
 thi lewd , pestifer , and dissenti prank , 
 as veri infant prattl of thi pride . 
 thou art a most pernici usur ; 
 froward by natur , enemi to peac ; 
 lascivi , wanton , more than well beseem 
 a man of thi profess and degre ; 
 and for thi treacheri , what 's more manifest 
 in that thou laid'st a trap to take my life , 
 as well at london bridg as at the tower ? 
 besid , i fear me , if thi thought were sift , 
 the king , thi sovereign , is not quit exempt 
 from enviou malic of thi swell heart . 
 winchest . gloucest , i do defi thee . lord , vouchsaf 
 to give me hear what i shall repli . 
 if i were covet , ambiti , or pervers , 
 as he will have me , how am i so poor ? 
 or how hap it i seek not to advanc 
 or rais myself , but keep my wont call ? 
 and for dissens , who preferreth peac 
 more than i do , except i be provok 'd ? 
 no , my good lord , it is not that offend ; 
 it is not that that incen 'd hath incen 'd the duke : 
 it is becaus no one should sway but he ; 
 no one but he should be about the king ; 
 and that engend thunder in hi breast 
 and make him roar these accus forth . 
 but he shall know i am as good 
 gloucest . as good ! 
 thou bastard of my grandfath ! 
 winchest . ay , lordli sir ; for what are you , i pray , 
 but one imperi in anoth 's throne ? 
 gloucest . am i not protector , sauci priest ? 
 winchest . and am not i a prelat of the church ? 
 gloucest . ye , as an outlaw in a castl keep , 
 and useth it to patronag hi theft . 
 winchest . unrever gloucest ! 
 gloucest . thou art reverend 
 touch thi spiritu function , not thi life . 
 winchest . rome shall remedi thi . 
 warwick . roam thither then . 
 somerset . my lord , it were your duti to forbear . 
 warwick . ay , see the bishop be not overborn . 
 somerset . methink my lord should be religi , 
 and know the offic that belong to such . 
 warwick . methink hi lordship should be humbler ; 
 it fitteth not a prelat so to plead . 
 somerset . ye , when hi holi state is touch 'd so near . 
 warwick . state holi or unhallow 'd , what of that ? 
 is not hi grace protector to the king ? 
 plantagenet . [ asid ] plantagenet , i see , must hold hi 
 tongu , 
 lest it be said 'speak , sirrah , when you should ; 
 must your bold verdict enter talk with lord ? ' 
 els would i have a fling at winchest . 
 king henri . uncl of gloucest and of winchest , 
 the special watchmen of our english weal , 
 i would prevail , if prayer might prevail 
 to join your heart in love and amiti . 
 o , what a scandal is it to our crown 
 that two such nobl peer as ye should jar ! 
 believ me , lord , my tender year can tell 
 civil dissens is a viper worm 
 that gnaw the bowel of the commonwealth . 
 [ a nois within : 'down with the tawni coat ! ' ] 
 what tumult 's thi ? 
 warwick . an uproar , i dare warrant , 
 begun through malic of the bishop 's men . 
 [ a nois again : 'stone ! stone ! ' ] 
 
 enter the mayor of london , attend 
 
 mayor . o , my good lord , and virtuou henri , 
 piti the citi of london , piti us ! 
 the bishop and the duke of gloucest 's men , 
 forbidden late to carri ani weapon , 
 have fill 'd their pocket full of pebbl stone 
 and , band themselv in contrari part , 
 do pelt so fast at one anoth 's pate 
 that mani have their giddi brain knock 'd out . 
 our window are broke down in everi street , 
 and we for fear compel 'd to shut our shop . 
 
 enter in skirmish , the retain of gloucest and 
 winchest , with bloodi pate 
 
 king henri . we charg you , on allegi to ourself , 
 to hold your slaught'r hand and keep the peac . 
 pray , uncl gloucest , mitig thi strife . 
 first serving-man . nay , if we be forbidden stone , we 'll 
 fall to it with our teeth . 
 second serving-man . do what ye dare , we are as resolut . 
 [ skirmish again ] 
 gloucest . you of my household , leav thi peevish broil , 
 and set thi unaccustom 'd fight asid . 
 third serving-man . my lord , we know your grace to be a 
 man 
 just and upright , and for your royal birth 
 inferior to none but to hi majesti ; 
 and ere that we will suffer such a princ , 
 so kind a father of the commonw , 
 to be disgrac by an inkhorn mate , 
 we and our wive and children all will fight 
 and have our bodi slaught'r by thi foe . 
 first serving-man . ay , and the veri pare of our nail 
 shall pitch a field when we are dead . [ begin again ] 
 gloucest . stay , stay , i say ! 
 and if you love me , as you say you do , 
 let me persuad you to forbear awhil . 
 king henri . o , how thi discord doth afflict my soul ! 
 can you , my lord of winchest , behold 
 my sigh and tear and will not onc relent ? 
 who should be piti , if you be not ? 
 or who should studi to prefer a peac , 
 if holi churchmen take delight in broil ? 
 warwick . yield , my lord protector ; yield , winchest ; 
 except you mean with obstin repuls 
 to slay your sovereign and destroy the realm . 
 you see what mischief , and what murder too , 
 hath been enact through your enmiti ; 
 then be at peac , except ye thirst for blood . 
 winchest . he shall submit , or i will never yield . 
 gloucest . compass on the king command me stoop , 
 or i would see hi heart out ere the priest 
 should ever get that privileg of me . 
 warwick . behold , my lord of winchest , the duke 
 hath banish 'd moodi discont furi , 
 as by hi smooth brow it doth appear ; 
 whi look you still so stem and tragic ? 
 gloucest . here , winchest , i offer thee my hand . 
 king henri . fie , uncl beaufort ! i have heard you preach 
 that malic wa a great and grievou sin ; 
 and will not you maintain the thing you teach , 
 but prove a chief offend in the same ? 
 warwick . sweet king ! the bishop hath a kindli gird . 
 for shame , my lord of winchest , relent ; 
 what , shall a child instruct you what to do ? 
 winchest . well , duke of gloucest , i will yield to thee ; 
 love for thi love and hand for hand i give . 
 gloucest [ asid ] ay , but , i fear me , with a hollow 
 heart . 
 see here , my friend and love countrymen : 
 thi token serveth for a flag of truce 
 betwixt ourselv and all our follow . 
 so help me god , as i dissembl not ! 
 winchest [ asid ] so help me god , as i intend it not ! 
 king henri . o love uncl , kind duke of gloucest , 
 how joy am i made by thi contract ! 
 away , my master ! troubl us no more ; 
 but join in friendship , as your lord have done . 
 first serving-man . content : i 'll to the surgeon 's . 
 second serving-man . and so will i . 
 third serving-man . and i will see what physic the tavern 
 afford . exeunt servant , mayor , & c. 
 warwick . accept thi scroll , most graciou sovereign ; 
 which in the right of richard plantagenet 
 we do exhibit to your majesti . 
 gloucest . well urg 'd , my lord of warwick ; for , sweet 
 princ , 
 an if your grace mark everi circumst , 
 you have great reason to do richard right ; 
 especi for those occas 
 at eltham place i told your majesti . 
 king henri . and those occas , uncl , were of forc ; 
 therefor , my love lord , our pleasur is 
 that richard be restor to hi blood . 
 warwick . let richard be restor to hi blood ; 
 so shall hi father 's wrong be recompen 'd . 
 winchest . as will the rest , so willeth winchest . 
 king henri . if richard will be true , not that alon 
 but all the whole inherit i give 
 that doth belong unto the hous of york , 
 from whenc you spring by lineal descent . 
 plantagenet . thi humbl servant vow obedi 
 and humbl servic till the point of death . 
 king henri . stoop then and set your knee against my foot ; 
 and in reguerdon of that duti done 
 i girt thee with the valiant sword of york . 
 rise , richard , like a true plantagenet , 
 and rise creat princ duke of york . 
 plantagenet . and so thrive richard as thi foe may fall ! 
 and as my duti spring , so perish they 
 that grudg one thought against your majesti ! 
 all . welcom , high princ , the mighti duke of york ! 
 somerset . [ asid ] perish , base princ , ignobl duke of 
 york ! 
 gloucest . now will it best avail your majesti 
 to cross the sea and to be crown 'd in franc : 
 the presenc of a king engend love 
 amongst hi subject and hi loyal friend , 
 as it disanim hi enemi . 
 king henri . when gloucest say the word , king henri 
 goe ; 
 for friendli counsel cut off mani foe . 
 gloucest . your ship alreadi are in readi . 
 sennet . flourish . exeunt all but exet 
 exet . ay , we may march in england or in franc , 
 not see what is like to ensu . 
 thi late dissens grown betwixt the peer 
 burn under feign ash of forg 'd love 
 and will at last break out into a flame ; 
 as fest'r member rot but by degre 
 till bone and flesh and sinew fall away , 
 so will thi base and enviou discord breed . 
 and now i fear that fatal propheci . 
 which in the time of henri nam 'd the fifth 
 wa in the mouth of everi suck babe : 
 that henri born at monmouth should win all , 
 and henri born at windsor should lose all . 
 which is so plain that exet doth wish 
 hi day may finish ere that hapless time . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 franc . befor rouen 
 
 enter la pucel disgui 'd , with four soldier dress 
 like countrymen , with sack upon their back 
 
 pucel . these are the citi gate , the gate of rouen , 
 through which our polici must make a breach . 
 take heed , be wari how you place your word ; 
 talk like the vulgar sort of market-men 
 that come to gather money for their corn . 
 if we have entranc , as i hope we shall , 
 and that we find the sloth watch but weak , 
 i 'll by a sign give notic to our friend , 
 that charl the dauphin may encount them . 
 first soldier . our sack shall be a mean to sack the citi , 
 and we be lord and ruler over rouen ; 
 therefor we 'll knock . [ knock ] 
 watch . [ within ] qui est la ? 
 pucel . paysan , pauvr gen de franc 
 poor market-folk that come to sell their corn . 
 watch . enter , go in ; the market-bel is rung . 
 pucel . now , rouen , i 'll shake thi bulwark to the 
 ground . 
 
 [ la pucel , & c. , enter the town ] 
 
 enter charl , bastard , alencon , reignier , and forc 
 
 charl . saint deni bless thi happi stratagem ! 
 and onc again we 'll sleep secur in rouen . 
 bastard . here ent'r pucel and her practis ; 
 now she is there , how will she specifi 
 here is the best and safest passag in ? 
 alencon . by thrust out a torch from yonder tower ; 
 which onc discern 'd show that her mean is 
 no way to that , for weak , which she ent'r . 
 
 enter la pucel , on the top , thrust out 
 a torch burn 
 
 pucel . behold , thi is the happi wed torch 
 that joineth rouen unto her countrymen , 
 but burn fatal to the talbotit . exit 
 bastard . see , nobl charl , the beacon of our friend ; 
 the burn torch in yonder turret stand . 
 charl . now shine it like a comet of reveng , 
 a prophet to the fall of all our foe ! 
 alencon . defer no time , delay have danger end ; 
 enter , and cri 'the dauphin ! ' present , 
 and then do execut on the watch . alarum . exeunt 
 
 an alarum . enter talbot in an excurs 
 
 talbot . franc , thou shalt rue thi treason with thi tear , 
 if talbot but surviv thi treacheri . 
 pucel , that witch , that damn sorceress , 
 hath wrought thi hellish mischief unawar , 
 that hardli we escap 'd the pride of franc . exit 
 
 an alarum ; excurs . bedford brought in sick in 
 a chair . enter talbot and burgundi without ; 
 within , la pucel , charl , bastard , alencon , 
 and reignier , on the wall 
 
 pucel . good morrow , gallant ! want ye corn for bread ? 
 i think the duke of burgundi will fast 
 befor he 'll buy again at such a rate . 
 't wa full of darnel-do you like the tast ? 
 burgundi . scoff on , vile fiend and shameless courtezan . 
 i trust ere long to choke thee with thine own , 
 and make thee curs the harvest of that corn . 
 charl . your grace may starv , perhap , befor that time . 
 bedford . o , let no word , but deed , reveng thi treason ! 
 pucel . what you do , good grey beard ? break a 
 lanc , 
 and run a tilt at death within a chair ? 
 talbot . foul fiend of franc and hag of all despit , 
 encompass 'd with thi lust paramour , 
 becom it thee to taunt hi valiant age 
 and twit with cowardic a man half dead ? 
 damsel , i 'll have a bout with you again , 
 or els let talbot perish with thi shame . 
 pucel . are ye so hot , sir ? yet , pucel , hold thi peac ; 
 if talbot do but thunder , rain will follow . 
 [ the english parti whisper togeth in council ] 
 god speed the parliament ! who shall be the speaker ? 
 talbot . dare ye come forth and meet us in the field ? 
 pucel . belik your lordship take us then for fool , 
 to tri if that our own be our or no . 
 talbot . i speak not to that rail hecat , 
 but unto thee , alencon , and the rest . 
 will ye , like soldier , come and fight it out ? 
 alencon . signior , no . 
 talbot . signior , hang ! base mulet of franc ! 
 like peasant foot-boy do they keep the wall , 
 and dare not take up arm like gentlemen . 
 pucel . away , captain ! let 's get us from the wall ; 
 for talbot mean no good by hi look . 
 god b'uy , my lord ; we came but to tell you 
 that we are here . exeunt from the wall 
 talbot . and there will we be too , ere it be long , 
 or els reproach be talbot 's greatest fame ! 
 vow , burgundi , by honour of thi hous , 
 prick 'd on by public wrong sustain 'd in franc , 
 either to get the town again or die ; 
 and i , as sure as english henri live 
 and as hi father here wa conqueror , 
 as sure as in thi late betray town 
 great coeur-de-lion 's heart wa buri 
 so sure i swear to get the town or die . 
 burgundi . my vow are equal partner with thi vow . 
 talbot . but ere we go , regard thi die princ , 
 the valiant duke of bedford . come , my lord , 
 we will bestow you in some better place , 
 fitter for sick and for crazi age . 
 bedford . lord talbot , do not so dishonour me ; 
 here will i sit befor the wall of rouen , 
 and will be partner of your weal or woe . 
 burgundi . courag bedford , let us now persuad you . 
 bedford . not to be gone from henc ; for onc i read 
 that stout pendragon in hi litter sick 
 came to the field , and vanquish hi foe . 
 methink i should reviv the soldier ' heart , 
 becaus i ever found them as myself . 
 talbot . undaunt spirit in a die breast ! 
 then be it so . heaven keep old bedford safe ! 
 and now no more ado , brave burgundi , 
 but gather we our forc out of hand 
 and set upon our boast enemi . 
 exeunt against the town all but bedford and attend 
 
 an alarum ; excurs . enter sir john fastolf , 
 and a captain 
 
 captain . whither away , sir john fastolf , in such hast ? 
 fastolf . whither away ? to save myself by flight : 
 we are like to have the overthrow again . 
 captain . what ! will you and leav lord talbot ? 
 fastolf . ay , 
 all the talbot in the world , to save my life . exit 
 captain . cowardli knight ! ill fortun follow thee ! 
 exit into the town 
 
 retreat ; excurs . la pucel , alencon , 
 and charl fli 
 
 bedford . now , quiet soul , depart when heaven pleas , 
 for i have seen our enemi ' overthrow . 
 what is the trust or strength of foolish man ? 
 they that of late were dare with their scoff 
 are glad and fain by flight to save themselv . 
 [ bedford die and is carri in by two in hi chair ] 
 
 an alarum . re-ent talbot , burgundi , and the rest 
 
 talbot . lost and recov in a day again ! 
 thi is a doubl honour , burgundi . 
 yet heaven have glori for thi victori ! 
 burgundi . warlik and martial talbot , burgundi 
 enshrin thee in hi heart , and there erect 
 thi nobl deed as valour 's monument . 
 talbot . thank , gentl duke . but where is pucel now ? 
 i think her old familiar is asleep . 
 now where 's the bastard 's brave , and charl hi gleek ? 
 what , all amort ? rouen hang her head for grief 
 that such a valiant compani are fled . 
 now will we take some order in the town , 
 place therein some expert offic ; 
 and then depart to pari to the king , 
 for there young henri with hi nobl lie . 
 burgundi . what lord talbot pleaseth burgundi . 
 talbot . but yet , befor we go , let 's not forget 
 the nobl duke of bedford , late decea 'd , 
 but see hi exequi fulfil 'd in rouen . 
 a braver soldier never couch lanc , 
 a gentler heart did never sway in court ; 
 but king and mightiest potent must die , 
 for that 's the end of human miseri . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the plain near rouen 
 
 enter charl , the bastard , alencon , la pucel , 
 and forc 
 
 pucel . dismay not , princ , at thi accid , 
 nor griev that rouen is so recov . 
 care is no cure , but rather corros , 
 for thing that are not to be remedi . 
 let frantic talbot triumph for a while 
 and like a peacock sweep along hi tail ; 
 we 'll pull hi plume and take away hi train , 
 if dauphin and the rest will be but rul 'd . 
 charl . we have guid by thee hitherto , 
 and of thi cun had no diffid ; 
 one sudden foil shall never breed distrust 
 bastard . search out thi wit for secret polici , 
 and we will make thee famou through the world . 
 alencon . we 'll set thi statu in some holi place , 
 and have thee reverenc 'd like a bless saint . 
 employ thee , then , sweet virgin , for our good . 
 pucel . then thu it must be ; thi doth joan devis : 
 by fair persuas , mix 'd with sug'r word , 
 we will entic the duke of burgundi 
 to leav the talbot and to follow us . 
 charl . ay , marri , sweet , if we could do that , 
 franc were no place for henri 's warrior ; 
 nor should that nation boast it so with us , 
 but be extirp from our provinc . 
 alencon . for ever should they be expul 'd from franc , 
 and not have tide of an earldom here . 
 pucel . your honour shall perceiv how i will work 
 to bring thi matter to the wish end . 
 [ drum sound afar off ] 
 hark ! by the sound of drum you may perceiv 
 their power are march unto paris-ward . 
 
 here sound an english march . enter , and pass over 
 at a distanc , talbot and hi forc 
 
 there goe the talbot , with hi colour spread , 
 and all the troop of english after him . 
 
 french march . enter the duke of burgundi and 
 hi forc 
 
 now in the rearward come the duke and hi . 
 fortun in favour make him lag behind . 
 summon a parley ; we will talk with him . 
 [ trumpet sound a parley ] 
 charl . a parley with the duke of burgundi ! 
 burgundi . who crave a parley with the burgundi ? 
 pucel . the princ charl of franc , thi countryman . 
 burgundi . what say'st thou , charl ? for i am march 
 henc . 
 charl . speak , pucel , and enchant him with thi word . 
 pucel . brave burgundi , undoubt hope of franc ! 
 stay , let thi humbl handmaid speak to thee . 
 burgundi . speak on ; but be not over-tedi . 
 pucel . look on thi countri , look on fertil franc , 
 and see the citi and the town defac 'd 
 by wast ruin of the cruel foe ; 
 as look the mother on her lowli babe 
 when death doth close hi tender die eye , 
 see , see the pine maladi of franc ; 
 behold the wound , the most unnatur wound , 
 which thou thyself hast given her woeful breast . 
 o , turn thi edg sword anoth way ; 
 strike those that hurt , and hurt not those that help ! 
 one drop of blood drawn from thi countri 's bosom 
 should griev thee more than stream of foreign gore . 
 return thee therefor with a flood of tear , 
 and wash away thi countri 's stain spot . 
 burgundi . either she hath bewitch 'd me with her word , 
 or natur make me suddenli relent . 
 pucel . besid , all french and franc exclaim on thee , 
 doubt thi birth and law progeni . 
 who join'st thou with but with a lordli nation 
 that will not trust thee but for profit 's sake ? 
 when talbot hath set foot onc in franc , 
 and fashion 'd thee that instrument of ill , 
 who then but english henri will be lord , 
 and thou be thrust out like a fugit ? 
 call we to mind-and mark but thi for proof : 
 wa not the duke of orlean thi foe ? 
 and wa he not in england prison ? 
 but when they heard he wa thine enemi 
 they set him free without hi ransom paid , 
 in spite of burgundi and all hi friend . 
 see then , thou fight'st against thi countrymen , 
 and join'st with them will be thi slaughtermen . 
 come , come , return ; return , thou wander lord ; 
 charl and the rest will take thee in their arm . 
 burgundi . i am vanquish ; these haughti word of her 
 have batt'r me like roar cannon-shot 
 and made me almost yield upon my knee . 
 forgiv me , countri , and sweet countrymen 
 and , lord , accept thi hearti kind embrac . 
 my forc and my power of men are your ; 
 so , farewel , talbot ; i 'll no longer trust thee . 
 pucel . done like a frenchman- [ asid ] turn and turn 
 again . 
 charl . welcom , brave duke ! thi friendship make us 
 fresh . 
 bastard . and doth beget new courag in our breast . 
 alencon . pucel hath brave play 'd her part in thi , 
 and doth deserv a coronet of gold . 
 charl . now let us on , my lord , and join our power , 
 and seek how we may prejudic the foe . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 pari . the palac 
 
 enter the king , gloucest , winchest , york , 
 suffolk , somerset , warwick , exet , 
 vernon , basset , and other . to them , with 
 hi soldier , talbot 
 
 talbot . my graciou princ , and honour peer , 
 hear of your arriv in thi realm , 
 i have awhil given truce unto my war 
 to do my duti to my sovereign ; 
 in sign whereof , thi arm that hath reclaim 'd 
 to your obedi fifti fortress , 
 twelv citi , and seven wall town of strength , 
 besid five hundr prison of esteem , 
 let fall hi sword befor your high ' feet , 
 and with submiss loyalti of heart 
 ascrib the glori of hi conquest got 
 first to my god and next unto your grace . [ kneel ] 
 king henri . is thi the lord talbot , uncl gloucest , 
 that hath so long been resid in franc ? 
 gloucest . ye , if it pleas your majesti , my lieg . 
 king henri . welcom , brave captain and victori lord ! 
 when i wa young , as yet i am not old , 
 i do rememb how my father said 
 a stouter champion never handl sword . 
 long sinc we were resolv of your truth , 
 your faith servic , and your toil in war ; 
 yet never have you tast our reward , 
 or been reguerdon 'd with so much as thank , 
 becaus till now we never saw your face . 
 therefor stand up ; and for these good desert 
 we here creat you earl of shrewsburi ; 
 and in our coron take your place . 
 sennet . flourish . exeunt all but vernon and basset 
 vernon . now , sir , to you , that were so hot at sea , 
 disgrac of these colour that i wear 
 in honour of my nobl lord of york 
 dar'st thou maintain the former word thou spak'st ? 
 basset . ye , sir ; as well as you dare patronag 
 the enviou bark of your sauci tongu 
 against my lord the duke of somerset . 
 vernon . sirrah , thi lord i honour as he is . 
 basset . whi , what is he ? as good a man as york ! 
 vernon . hark ye : not so . in wit , take ye that . 
 [ strike him ] 
 basset . villain , thou knowest the law of arm is such 
 that whoso draw a sword 't is present death , 
 or els thi blow should broach thi dearest blood . 
 but i 'll unto hi majesti and crave 
 i may have liberti to veng thi wrong ; 
 when thou shalt see i 'll meet thee to thi cost . 
 vernon . well , miscreant , i 'll be there as soon as you ; 
 and , after , meet you sooner than you would . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene < num > . 
 
 park . the palac 
 
 enter the king , gloucest , winchest , york , suffolk , somerset , warwick , 
 talbot , exet , the governor of pari , and other 
 
 gloucest . lord bishop , set the crown upon hi head . 
 winchest . god save king henri , of that name the sixth ! 
 gloucest . now , governor of pari , take your oath 
 [ governor kneel ] 
 that you elect no other king but him , 
 esteem none friend but such as are hi friend , 
 and none your foe but such as shall pretend 
 malici practic against hi state . 
 thi shall ye do , so help you righteou god ! 
 exeunt governor and hi train 
 
 enter sir john fastolf 
 
 fastolf . my graciou sovereign , as i rode from calai , 
 to hast unto your coron , 
 a letter wa deliv 'd to my hand , 
 writ to your grace from th ' duke of burgundi . 
 talbot . shame to the duke of burgundi and thee ! 
 i vow 'd , base knight , when i did meet thee next 
 to tear the garter from thi craven 's leg , [ pluck it off ] 
 which i have done , becaus unworthili 
 thou wast instal in that high degre . 
 pardon me , princ henri , and the rest : 
 thi dastard , at the battl of patay , 
 when but in all i wa six thousand strong , 
 and that the french were almost ten to one , 
 befor we met or that a stroke wa given , 
 like to a trusti squir did run away ; 
 in which assault we lost twelv hundr men ; 
 myself and diver gentlemen besid 
 were there surpri 'd and taken prison . 
 then judg , great lord , if i have done amiss , 
 or whether that such coward ought to wear 
 thi ornament of knighthood-yea or no . 
 gloucest . to say the truth , thi fact wa infam 
 and ill beseem ani common man , 
 much more a knight , a captain , and a leader . 
 talbot . when first thi order wa ordain 'd , my lord , 
 knight of the garter were of nobl birth , 
 valiant and virtuou , full of haughti courag , 
 such as were grown to credit by the war ; 
 not fear death nor shrink for distress , 
 but alway resolut in most extrem . 
 he then that is not furnish 'd in thi sort 
 doth but usurp the sacr name of knight , 
 profan thi most honour order , 
 and should , if i were worthi to be judg , 
 be quit degrad , like a hedge-born swain 
 that doth presum to boast of gentl blood . 
 king henri . stain to thi countrymen , thou hear'st thi 
 doom . 
 be pack , therefor , thou that wast a knight ; 
 henceforth we banish thee on pain of death . 
 exit fastolf 
 and now , my lord protector , view the letter 
 sent from our uncl duke of burgundi . 
 gloucest . [ view the superscript ] what mean hi 
 grace , that he hath chang 'd hi style ? 
 no more but plain and bluntli 'to the king ! ' 
 hath he forgot he is hi sovereign ? 
 or doth thi churlish superscript 
 pretend some alter in good-wil ? 
 what 's here ? [ read ] ' i have , upon especi caus , 
 mov 'd with compass of my countri 's wreck , 
 togeth with the piti complaint 
 of such as your oppress feed upon , 
 forsaken your pernici faction , 
 and join 'd with charl , the right king of franc . ' 
 o monstrou treacheri ! can thi be so 
 that in allianc , amiti , and oath , 
 there should be found such fals dissembl guil ? 
 king henri . what ! doth my uncl burgundi revolt ? 
 gloucest . he doth , my lord , and is becom your foe . 
 king henri . is that the worst thi letter doth contain ? 
 gloucest . it is the worst , and all , my lord , he write . 
 king henri . whi then lord talbot there shall talk with 
 him 
 and give him chastis for thi abus . 
 how say you , my lord , are you not content ? 
 talbot . content , my lieg ! ye ; but that i am prevent , 
 i should have begg 'd i might have been employ 'd . 
 king henri . then gather strength and march unto him 
 straight ; 
 let him perceiv how ill we brook hi treason . 
 and what offenc it is to flout hi friend . 
 talbot . i go , my lord , in heart desir still 
 you may behold confus of your foe . exit 
 
 enter vernon and basset 
 
 vernon . grant me the combat , graciou sovereign . 
 basset . and me , my lord , grant me the combat too . 
 york . thi is my servant : hear him , nobl princ . 
 somerset . and thi is mine : sweet henri , favour him . 
 king henri . be patient , lord , and give them leav to speak . 
 say , gentlemen , what make you thu exclaim , 
 and wherefor crave you combat , or with whom ? 
 vernon . with him , my lord ; for he hath done me wrong . 
 basset . and i with him ; for he hath done me wrong . 
 king henri . what is that wrong whereof you both 
 complain ? first let me know , and then i 'll answer you . 
 basset . cross the sea from england into franc , 
 thi fellow here , with enviou carp tongu , 
 upbraid me about the rose i wear , 
 say the sanguin colour of the leav 
 did repres my master 's blush cheek 
 when stubbornli he did repugn the truth 
 about a certain question in the law 
 argu 'd betwixt the duke of york and him ; 
 with other vile and ignomini term 
 in confut of which rude reproach 
 and in defenc of my lord 's worthi , 
 i crave the benefit of law of arm . 
 vernon . and that is my petit , nobl lord ; 
 for though he seem with forg quaint conceit 
 to set a gloss upon hi bold intent , 
 yet know , my lord , i wa provok 'd by him , 
 and he first took except at thi badg , 
 pronounc that the pale of thi flower 
 bewray 'd the faint of my master 's heart . 
 york . will not thi malic , somerset , be left ? 
 somerset . your privat grudg , my lord of york , will out , 
 though ne'er so cunningli you smother it . 
 king henri . good lord , what mad rule in brainsick 
 men , when for so slight and frivol a caus 
 such factiou emul shall aris ! 
 good cousin both , of york and somerset , 
 quiet yourselv , i pray , and be at peac . 
 york . let thi dissens first be tri by fight , 
 and then your high shall command a peac . 
 somerset . the quarrel toucheth none but us alon ; 
 betwixt ourselv let us decid it then . 
 york . there is my pledg ; accept it , somerset . 
 vernon . nay , let it rest where it began at first . 
 basset . confirm it so , mine honour lord . 
 gloucest . confirm it so ? confound be your strife ; 
 and perish ye , with your audaci prate ! 
 presumptu vassal , are you not asham 'd 
 with thi immodest clamor outrag 
 to troubl and disturb the king and us ? 
 and you , my lords- methink you do not well 
 to bear with their pervers object , 
 much less to take occas from their mouth 
 to rais a mutini betwixt yourselv . 
 let me persuad you take a better cours . 
 exet . it griev hi high . good my lord , be friend . 
 king henri . come hither , you that would be combat : 
 henceforth i charg you , as you love our favour , 
 quit to forget thi quarrel and the caus . 
 and you , my lord , rememb where we are : 
 in franc , amongst a fickl waver nation ; 
 if they perceiv dissens in our look 
 and that within ourselv we disagre , 
 how will their grudg stomach be provok 'd 
 to wil disobedi , and rebel ! 
 besid , what infami will there aris 
 when foreign princ shall be certifi 
 that for a toy , a thing of no regard , 
 king henri 's peer and chief nobil 
 destroy 'd themselv and lost the realm of franc ! 
 o , think upon the conquest of my father , 
 my tender year ; and let us not forgo 
 that for a trifl that wa bought with blood ! 
 let me be umpir in thi doubt strife . 
 i see no reason , if i wear thi rose , 
 [ put on a red rose ] 
 that ani one should therefor be suspici 
 i more inclin to somerset than york : 
 both are my kinsmen , and i love them both . 
 as well they may upbraid me with my crown , 
 becaus , forsooth , the king of scot is crown 'd . 
 but your discret better can persuad 
 than i am abl to instruct or teach ; 
 and , therefor , as we hither came in peac , 
 so let us still continu peac and love . 
 cousin of york , we institut your grace 
 to be our regent in these part of franc . 
 and , good my lord of somerset , unit 
 your troop of horsemen with hi band of foot ; 
 and like true subject , son of your progenitor , 
 go cheer togeth and digest 
 your angri choler on your enemi . 
 ourself , my lord protector , and the rest , 
 after some respit will return to calai ; 
 from thenc to england , where i hope ere long 
 to be present by your victori 
 with charl , alencon , and that traitor rout . 
 flourish . exeunt all but york , warwick , 
 exet , vernon 
 warwick . my lord of york , i promis you , the king 
 prettili , methought , did play the orat . 
 york . and so he did ; but yet i like it not , 
 in that he wear the badg of somerset . 
 warwick . tush , that wa but hi fanci ; blame him not ; 
 i dare presum , sweet princ , he thought no harm . 
 york . an if i wist he did-but let it rest ; 
 other affair must now be manag . 
 exeunt all but exet 
 exet . well didst thou , richard , to suppress thi voic ; 
 for had the passion of thi heart burst out , 
 i fear we should have seen deciph 'd there 
 more rancor spite , more furiou rage broil , 
 than yet can be imagin 'd or suppo 'd . 
 but howsoe' , no simpl man that see 
 thi jar discord of nobil , 
 thi shoulder of each other in the court , 
 thi factiou bandi of their favourit , 
 but that it doth presag some ill event . 
 't is much when sceptr are in children 's hand ; 
 but more when envi breed unkind divis : 
 there come the ruin , there begin confus . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 franc . befor bordeaux 
 
 enter talbot , with trump and drum 
 
 talbot . go to the gate of bordeaux , trumpet ; 
 summon their gener unto the wall . 
 
 trumpet sound a parley . enter , aloft , the 
 gener of the french , and other 
 
 english john talbot , captain , call you forth , 
 servant in arm to harri king of england ; 
 and thu he would open your citi gate , 
 be humbl to us , call my sovereignvour 
 and do him homag as obedi subject , 
 and i 'll withdraw me and my bloodi power ; 
 but if you frown upon thi proffer 'd peac , 
 you tempt the furi of my three attend , 
 lean famin , quarter steel , and climb fire ; 
 who in a moment even with the earth 
 shall lay your state and air brave tower , 
 if you forsak the offer of their love . 
 gener of the french . thou omin and fear owl of 
 death , 
 our nation 's terror and their bloodi scourg ! 
 the period of thi tyranni approacheth . 
 on us thou canst not enter but by death ; 
 for , i protest , we are well fortifi , 
 and strong enough to issu out and fight . 
 if thou retir , the dauphin , well appoint , 
 stand with the snare of war to tangl thee . 
 on either hand thee there are squadron pitch 'd 
 to wall thee from the liberti of flight , 
 and no way canst thou turn thee for redress 
 but death doth front thee with appar spoil 
 and pale destruct meet thee in the face . 
 ten thousand french have ta'en the sacrament 
 to rive their danger artilleri 
 upon no christian soul but english talbot . 
 lo , there thou stand'st , a breath valiant man , 
 of an invinc unconqu 'd spirit ! 
 thi is the latest glori of thi prais 
 that i , thi enemi , due thee withal ; 
 for ere the glass that now begin to run 
 finish the process of hi sandi hour , 
 these eye that see thee now well colour 
 shall see thee wither , bloodi , pale , and dead . 
 [ drum afar off ] 
 hark ! hark ! the dauphin 's drum , a warn bell , 
 sing heavi music to thi timor soul ; 
 and mine shall ring thi dire departur out . exit 
 talbot . he fabl not ; i hear the enemi . 
 out , some light horsemen , and perus their wing . 
 o , neglig and heedless disciplin ! 
 how are we park 'd and bound in a pale 
 a littl herd of england 's timor deer , 
 maz 'd with a yelp kennel of french cur ! 
 if we be english deer , be then in blood ; 
 not rascal-lik to fall down with a pinch , 
 but rather , moody-mad and desper stag , 
 turn on the bloodi hound with head of steel 
 and make the coward stand aloof at bay . 
 sell everi man hi life as dear as mine , 
 and they shall find dear deer of us , my friend . 
 god and saint georg , talbot and england 's right , 
 prosper our colour in thi danger fight ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 plain in gasconi 
 
 enter york , with trumpet and mani soldier . a 
 messeng meet him 
 
 york . are not the speedi scout return 'd again 
 that dogg 'd the mighti armi of the dauphin ? 
 messeng . they are return 'd , my lord , and give it out 
 that he is march 'd to bordeaux with hi power 
 to fight with talbot ; as he march 'd along , 
 by your espial were discov 
 two mightier troop than that the dauphin led , 
 which join 'd with him and made their march for 
 bordeaux . 
 york . a plagu upon that villain somerset 
 that thu delay my promis suppli 
 of horsemen that were levi for thi sieg ! 
 renown talbot doth expect my aid , 
 and i am lout by a traitor villain 
 and can not help the nobl chevali . 
 god comfort him in thi necess ! 
 if he miscarri , farewel war in franc . 
 
 enter sir william luci 
 
 luci . thou princ leader of our english strength , 
 never so need on the earth of franc , 
 spur to the rescu of the nobl talbot , 
 who now is girdl with a waist of iron 
 and hemm 'd about with grim destruct . 
 to bordeaux , warlik duke ! to bordeaux , york ! 
 els , farewel talbot , franc , and england 's honour . 
 york . o god , that somerset , who in proud heart 
 doth stop my cornet , were in talbot 's place ! 
 so should we save a valiant gentleman 
 by forfeit a traitor and a coward . 
 mad ire and wrath furi make me weep 
 that thu we die while remiss traitor sleep . 
 luci . o , send some succour to the distress 'd lord ! 
 york . he die ; we lose ; i break my warlik word . 
 we mourn : franc smile . we lose : they daili get- 
 all long of thi vile traitor somerset . 
 luci . then god take merci on brave talbot 's soul , 
 and on hi son , young john , who two hour sinc 
 i met in travel toward hi warlik father . 
 thi seven year did not talbot see hi son ; 
 and now they meet where both their live are done . 
 york . ala , what joy shall nobl talbot have 
 to bid hi young son welcom to hi grave ? 
 away ! vexat almost stop my breath , 
 that sund'r friend greet in the hour of death . 
 luci , farewel ; no more my fortun can 
 but curs the caus i can not aid the man . 
 main , bloi , poictier , and tour , are won away 
 long all of somerset and hi delay . exit with forc 
 luci . thu , while the vultur of sedit 
 feed in the bosom of such great command , 
 sleep neglect doth betray to loss 
 the conquest of our scarc cold conqueror , 
 that ever-liv man of memori , 
 henri the fifth . while they each other cross , 
 live , honour , land , and all , hurri to loss . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 other plain of gasconi 
 
 enter somerset , with hi forc ; an offic of 
 talbot 's with him 
 
 somerset . it is too late ; i can not send them now . 
 thi expedit wa by york and talbot 
 too rashli plot ; all our gener forc 
 might with a salli of the veri town 
 be buckl with . the over dare talbot 
 hath sulli all hi gloss of former honour 
 by thi unheed , desper , wild adventur . 
 york set him on to fight and die in shame . 
 that , talbot dead , great york might bear the name . 
 offic . here is sir william luci , who with me 
 set from our o'er-match 'd forc forth for aid . 
 
 enter sir william luci 
 
 somerset . how now , sir william ! whither were you sent ? 
 luci . whither , my lord ! from bought and sold lord 
 talbot , 
 who , ring 'd about with bold advers , 
 cri out for nobl york and somerset 
 to beat assail death from hi weak legion ; 
 and while the honour captain there 
 drop bloodi sweat from hi war-weari limb 
 and , in advantag ling'r , look for rescu , 
 you , hi fals hope , the trust of england 's honour , 
 keep off aloof with worthless emul . 
 let not your privat discord keep away 
 the levi succour that should lend him aid , 
 while he , renown nobl gentleman , 
 yield up hi life unto a world of odd . 
 orlean the bastard , charl , burgundi , 
 alencon , reignier , compass him about , 
 and talbot perisheth by your default . 
 somerset . york set him on ; york should have sent him aid . 
 luci . and york as fast upon your grace exclaim , 
 swear that you withhold hi levi host , 
 collect for thi expedit . 
 somerset . york lie ; he might have sent and had the hors . 
 i owe him littl duti and less love , 
 and take foul scorn to fawn on him by send . 
 luci . the fraud of england , not the forc of franc , 
 hath now entrapp 'd the nobl mind talbot . 
 never to england shall he bear hi life , 
 but die betray 'd to fortun by your strife . 
 somerset . come , go ; i will dispatch the horsemen straight ; 
 within six hour they will be at hi aid . 
 luci . too late come rescu ; he is ta'en or slain , 
 for fli he could not if he would have fled ; 
 and fli would talbot never , though he might . 
 somerset . if he be dead , brave talbot , then , adieu ! 
 luci . hi fame live in the world , hi shame in you . exeunt 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the english camp near bordeaux 
 
 enter talbot and john hi son 
 
 talbot . o young john talbot ! i did send for thee 
 to tutor thee in stratagem of war , 
 that talbot 's name might be in thee reviv 'd 
 when sapless age and weak unabl limb 
 should bring thi father to hi droop chair . 
 but , o malign and ill-bod star ! 
 now thou art come unto a feast of death , 
 a terribl and unavoid danger ; 
 therefor , dear boy , mount on my swiftest hors , 
 and i 'll direct thee how thou shalt escap 
 by sudden flight . come , dalli not , be gone . 
 john . is my name talbot , and am i your son ? 
 and shall i fli ? o , if you love my mother , 
 dishonour not her honour name , 
 to make a bastard and a slave of me ! 
 the world will say he is not talbot 's blood 
 that base fled when nobl talbot stood . 
 talbot . fli to reveng my death , if i be slain . 
 john . he that fli so will ne'er return again . 
 talbot . if we both stay , we both are sure to die . 
 john . then let me stay ; and , father , do you fli . 
 your loss is great , so your regard should be ; 
 my worth unknown , no loss is known in me ; 
 upon my death the french can littl boast ; 
 in your they will , in you all hope are lost . 
 flight can not stain the honour you have won ; 
 but mine it will , that no exploit have done ; 
 you fled for vantag , everi one will swear ; 
 but if i bow , they 'll say it wa for fear . 
 there is no hope that ever i will stay 
 if the first hour i shrink and run away . 
 here , on my knee , i beg mortal , 
 rather than life preserv 'd with infami . 
 talbot . shall all thi mother 's hope lie in one tomb ? 
 john . ay , rather than i 'll shame my mother 's womb . 
 talbot . upon my bless i command thee go . 
 john . to fight i will , but not to fli the foe . 
 talbot . part of thi father may be sav 'd in thee . 
 john . no part of him but will be shame in me . 
 talbot . thou never hadst renown , nor canst not lose it . 
 john . ye , your renown name ; shall flight abus it ? 
 talbot . thi father 's charg shall clear thee from that stain . 
 john . you can not wit for me , be slain . 
 if death be so appar , then both fli . 
 talbot . and leav my follow here to fight and die ? 
 my age wa never taint with such shame . 
 john . and shall my youth be guilti of such blame ? 
 no more can i be sever from your side 
 than can yourself yourself yourself in twain divid . 
 stay , go , do what you will , the like do i ; 
 for live i will not if my father die . 
 talbot . then here i take my leav of thee , fair son , 
 born to eclips thi life thi afternoon . 
 come , side by side togeth live and die ; 
 and soul with soul from franc to heaven fli . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 a field of battl 
 
 alarum : excurs wherein john talbot is hemm 'd 
 about , and talbot rescu him 
 
 talbot . saint georg and victori ! fight , soldier , fight . 
 the regent hath with talbot broke hi word 
 and left us to the rage of franc hi sword . 
 where is john talbot ? paus and take thi breath ; 
 i gave thee life and rescu 'd thee from death . 
 john . o , twice my father , twice am i thi son ! 
 the life thou gav'st me first wa lost and done 
 till with thi warlik sword , despit of fate , 
 to my determin 'd time thou gav'st new date . 
 talbot . when from the dauphin 's crest thi sword struck 
 fire , 
 it warm 'd thi father 's heart with proud desir 
 of bold-fac 'd victori . then leaden age , 
 quicken 'd with youth spleen and warlik rage , 
 beat down alencon , orlean , burgundi , 
 and from the pride of gallia rescu thee . 
 the ire bastard orlean , that drew blood 
 from thee , my boy , and had the maidenhood 
 of thi first fight , i soon encount 
 and , interchang blow , i quickli shed 
 some of hi bastard blood ; and in disgrac 
 bespok him thu : 'contamin , base , 
 and misbegotten blood i spill of thine , 
 mean and right poor , for that pure blood of mine 
 which thou didst forc from talbot , my brave boy . ' 
 here purpos the bastard to destroy , 
 came in strong rescu . speak , thi father 's care ; 
 art thou not weari , john ? how dost thou fare ? 
 wilt thou yet leav the battl , boy , and fli , 
 now thou art seal 'd the son of chivalri ? 
 fli , to reveng my death when i am dead : 
 the help of one stand me in littl stead . 
 o , too much folli is it , well i wot , 
 to hazard all our live in one small boat ! 
 if i to-day die not with frenchmen 's rage , 
 to-morrow i shall die with mickl age . 
 by me they noth gain an if i stay : 
 't is but the short'n of my life one day . 
 in thee thi mother die , our household 's name , 
 my death 's reveng , thi youth , and england 's fame . 
 all these and more we hazard by thi stay ; 
 all these are sav 'd if thou wilt fli away . 
 john . the sword of orlean hath not made me smart ; 
 these word of your draw life-blood from my heart . 
 on that advantag , bought with such a shame , 
 to save a paltri life and slay bright fame , 
 befor young talbot from old talbot fli , 
 the coward hors that bear me fall and die ! 
 and like me to the peasant boy of franc , 
 to be shame 's scorn and subject of mischanc ! 
 sure , by all the glori you have won , 
 an if i fli , i am not talbot 's son ; 
 then talk no more of flight , it is no boot ; 
 if son to talbot , die at talbot 's foot . 
 talbot . then follow thou thi desp'rat sire of crete , 
 thou icaru ; thi life to me is sweet . 
 if thou wilt fight , fight by thi father 's side ; 
 and , commend prov 'd , let 's die in pride . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 anoth part of the field 
 
 alarum ; excurs . enter old talbot led by a servant 
 
 talbot . where is my other life ? mine own is gone . 
 o , where 's young talbot ? where is valiant john ? 
 triumphant death , smear 'd with captiv , 
 young talbot 's valour make me smile at thee . 
 when he perceiv 'd me shrink and on my knee , 
 hi bloodi sword he brandish 'd over me , 
 and like a hungri lion did commenc 
 rough deed of rage and stern impati ; 
 but when my angri guardant stood alon , 
 tend'r my ruin and assail 'd of none , 
 dizzy-ey 'd furi and great rage of heart 
 suddenli made him from my side to start 
 into the clust'r battl of the french ; 
 and in that sea of blood my boy did drench 
 hi overmount spirit ; and there die , 
 my icaru , my blossom , in hi pride . 
 
 enter soldier , bear the bodi of john talbot 
 
 servant . o my dear lord , lo where your son is born ! 
 talbot . thou antic death , which laugh'st us here to scorn , 
 anon , from thi insult tyranni , 
 coupl in bond of perpetu , 
 two talbot , wing through the lither sky , 
 in thi despit shall scape mortal . 
 o thou whose wound becom hard-favour death , 
 speak to thi father ere thou yield thi breath ! 
 brave death by speak , whether he will or no ; 
 imagin him a frenchman and thi foe . 
 poor boy ! he smile , methink , as who should say , 
 had death been french , then death had die to-day . 
 come , come , and lay him in hi father 's arm . 
 my spirit can no longer bear these harm . 
 soldier , adieu ! i have what i would have , 
 now my old arm are young john talbot 's grave . [ die ] 
 
 enter charl , alencon , burgundi , bastard , 
 la pucel , and forc 
 
 charl . had york and somerset brought rescu in , 
 we should have found a bloodi day of thi . 
 bastard . how the young whelp of talbot 's , rage wood , 
 did flesh hi puni sword in frenchmen 's blood ! 
 pucel . onc i encount'r him , and thu i said : 
 'thou maiden youth , be vanquish 'd by a maid . ' 
 but with a proud majest high scorn 
 he answer 'd thu : 'young talbot wa not born 
 to be the pillag of a giglot wench . ' 
 so , rush in the bowel of the french , 
 he left me proudli , as unworthi fight . 
 burgundi . doubtless he would have made a nobl knight . 
 see where he lie inhears in the arm 
 of the most bloodi nurser of hi harm ! 
 bastard . hew them to piec , hack their bone asund , 
 whose life wa england 's glori , gallia 's wonder . 
 charl . o , no ; forbear ! for that which we have fled 
 dure the life , let us not wrong it dead . 
 
 enter sir william luci , attend ; a french 
 herald preced 
 
 luci . herald , conduct me to the dauphin 's tent , 
 to know who hath obtain 'd the glori of the day . 
 charl . on what submiss messag art thou sent ? 
 luci . submiss , dauphin ! 't is a mere french word : 
 we english warrior wot not what it mean . 
 i come to know what prison thou hast ta'en , 
 and to survey the bodi of the dead . 
 charl . for prison ask'st thou ? hell our prison is . 
 but tell me whom thou seek'st . 
 luci . but where 's the great alcid of the field , 
 valiant lord talbot , earl of shrewsburi , 
 creat for hi rare success in arm 
 great earl of washford , waterford , and valenc , 
 lord talbot of goodrig and urchinfield , 
 lord strang of blackmer , lord verdun of alton , 
 lord cromwel of wingfield , lord furniv of sheffield , 
 the thrice victori lord of falconbridg , 
 knight of the nobl order of saint georg , 
 worthi saint michael , and the golden fleec , 
 great marshal to henri the sixth 
 of all hi war within the realm of franc ? 
 pucel . here 's a silly-st style inde ! 
 the turk , that two and fifti kingdom hath , 
 write not so tediou a style as thi . 
 him that thou magnifi'st with all these tide , 
 stink and fly-blown lie here at our feet . 
 luci . is talbot slain-th frenchmen 's onli scourg , 
 your kingdom 's terror and black nemesi ? 
 o , were mine eye-ban into bullet turn 'd , 
 that i in rage might shoot them at your face ! 
 o that i could but can these dead to life ! 
 it were enough to fright the realm of franc . 
 were but hi pictur left amongst you here , 
 it would amaz the proudest of you all . 
 give me their bodi , that i may bear them henc 
 and give them burial as beseem their worth . 
 pucel . i think thi upstart is old talbot 's ghost , 
 he speak with such a proud command spirit . 
 for god 's sake , let him have them ; to keep them here , 
 they would but stink , and putrefi the air . 
 charl . go , take their bodi henc . 
 luci . i 'll bear them henc ; but from their ash shall be 
 rear 'd 
 a phoenix that shall make all franc afeard . 
 charl . so we be rid of them , do with them what thou 
 wilt . 
 and now to pari in thi conquer vein ! 
 all will be our , now bloodi talbot 's slain . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 sennet . enter the king , gloucest , and exet 
 
 king henri . have you peru 'd the letter from the pope , 
 the emperor , and the earl of armagnac ? 
 gloucest . i have , my lord ; and their intent is thi : 
 they humbl sue unto your excel 
 to have a godli peac conclud of 
 between the realm of england and of franc . 
 king henri . how doth your grace affect their motion ? 
 gloucest . well , my good lord , and as the onli mean 
 to stop effus of our christian blood 
 and stablish quiet on everi side . 
 king henri . ay , marri , uncl ; for i alway thought 
 it wa both impiou and unnatur 
 that such imman and bloodi strife 
 should reign among professor of one faith . 
 gloucest . besid , my lord , the sooner to effect 
 and surer bind thi knot of amiti , 
 the earl of armagnac , near knit to charl , 
 a man of great author in franc , 
 proffer hi onli daughter to your grace 
 in marriag , with a larg and sumptuou dowri . 
 king henri . marriag , uncl ! ala , my year are young 
 and fitter is my studi and my book 
 than wanton dallianc with a paramour . 
 yet call th ' ambassador , and , as you pleas , 
 so let them have their answer everi one . 
 i shall be well content with ani choic 
 tend to god 's glori and my countri 's weal . 
 
 enter in cardin 's habit 
 beaufort , the papal legat , and two ambassador 
 
 exet . what ! is my lord of winchest instal 'd 
 and call 'd unto a cardin 's degre ? 
 then i perceiv that will be verifi 
 henri the fifth did sometim prophesi : 
 'if onc he come to be a cardin , 
 he 'll make hi cap co-equ with the crown . ' 
 king henri . my lord ambassador , your sever suit 
 have been consid 'd and debat on . 
 your purpos is both good and reason , 
 and therefor are we certainli resolv 'd 
 to draw condit of a friendli peac , 
 which by my lord of winchest we mean 
 shall be transport present to franc . 
 gloucest . and for the proffer of my lord your master , 
 i have inform 'd hi high so at larg , 
 as , like of the ladi 's virtuou gift , 
 her beauti , and the valu of her dower , 
 he doth intend she shall be england 's queen . 
 king henri . [ to ambassador ] in argument and proof of 
 which contract , 
 bear her thi jewel , pledg of my affect . 
 and so , my lord protector , see them guard 
 and safe brought to dover ; where inshipp 'd , 
 commit them to the fortun of the sea . 
 
 exeunt all but winchest and the legat 
 winchest . stay , my lord legat ; you shall first receiv 
 the sum of money which i promis 
 should be deliv to hi holi 
 for cloth me in these grave ornament . 
 legat . i will attend upon your lordship 's leisur . 
 winchest . [ asid ] now winchest will not submit , i 
 trow , 
 or be inferior to the proudest peer . 
 humphrey of gloucest , thou shalt well perceiv 
 that neither in birth or for author 
 the bishop will be overborn by thee . 
 i 'll either make thee stoop and bend thi knee , 
 or sack thi countri with a mutini . exeunt 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 franc . plain in anjou 
 
 enter charl , burgundi , alencon , bastard , 
 reignier , la pucel , and forc 
 
 charl . these news , my lord , may cheer our droop 
 spirit : 
 't is said the stout parisian do revolt 
 and turn again unto the warlik french . 
 alencon . then march to pari , royal charl of franc , 
 and keep not back your power in dallianc . 
 pucel . peac be amongst them , if they turn to us ; 
 els ruin combat with their palac ! 
 
 enter a scout 
 
 scout . success unto our valiant gener , 
 and happi to hi accomplic ! 
 charl . what tide send our scout ? i prithe speak . 
 scout . the english armi , that divid wa 
 into two parti , is now conjoin 'd in one , 
 and mean to give you battl present . 
 charl . somewhat too sudden , sir , the warn is ; 
 but we will present provid for them . 
 burgundi . i trust the ghost of talbot is not there . 
 now he is gone , my lord , you need not fear . 
 pucel . of all base passion fear is most accur 'd . 
 command the conquest , charl , it shall be thine , 
 let henri fret and all the world repin . 
 charl . then on , my lord ; and franc be fortun ! 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 befor angier 
 
 alarum , excurs . enter la pucel 
 
 pucel . the regent conquer and the frenchmen fli . 
 now help , ye charm spell and periapt ; 
 and ye choic spirit that admonish me 
 and give me sign of futur accid ; [ thunder ] 
 you speedi helper that are substitut 
 under the lordli monarch of the north , 
 appear and aid me in thi enterpris ! 
 
 enter fiend 
 
 thi speedi and quick appear argu proof 
 of your accustom 'd dilig to me . 
 now , ye familiar spirit that are cull 'd 
 out of the power region under earth , 
 help me thi onc , that franc may get the field . 
 [ they walk and speak not ] 
 o , hold me not with silenc over-long ! 
 where i wa wont to feed you with my blood , 
 i 'll lop a member off and give it you 
 in earnest of a further benefit , 
 so you do condescend to help me now . 
 [ they hang their head ] 
 no hope to have redress ? my bodi shall 
 pay recompens , if you will grant my suit . 
 [ they shake their head ] 
 can not my bodi nor blood sacrific 
 entreat you to your wont further ? 
 then take my soul-mi bodi , soul , and all , 
 befor that england give the french the foil . 
 [ they depart ] 
 see ! they forsak me . now the time is come 
 that franc must vail her lofty-plum crest 
 and let her head fall into england 's lap . 
 my ancient incant are too weak , 
 and hell too strong for me to buckl with . 
 now , franc , thi glori droopeth to the dust . exit 
 
 excurs . enter french and english , fight . 
 la pucel and york fight hand to hand ; la pucel 
 is taken . the french fli 
 
 york . damsel of franc , i think i have you fast . 
 unchain your spirit now with spell charm , 
 and tri if they can gain your liberti . 
 a goodli prize , fit for the devil 's grace ! 
 see how the ugli witch doth bend her brow 
 as if , with circ , she would chang my shape ! 
 pucel . chang 'd to a worser shape thou canst not be . 
 york . o , charl the dauphin is a proper man : 
 no shape but hi can pleas your dainti eye . 
 pucel . a plagu mischief fight on charl and thee ! 
 and may ye both be suddenli surpri 'd 
 by bloodi hand , in sleep on your bed ! 
 york . fell ban hag ; enchantress , hold thi tongu . 
 pucel . i prithe give me leav to curs awhil . 
 york . curs , miscreant , when thou comest to the stake . 
 exeunt 
 
 alarum . enter suffolk , with margaret in hi hand 
 
 suffolk . be what thou wilt , thou art my prison . 
 [ gaze on her ] 
 o fairest beauti , do not fear nor fli ! 
 for i will touch thee but with rever hand ; 
 i kiss these finger for etern peac , 
 and lay them gentli on thi tender side . 
 who art thou ? say , that i may honour thee . 
 margaret . margaret my name , and daughter to a king , 
 the king of naples-whosoe' thou art . 
 suffolk . an earl i am , and suffolk am i call 'd . 
 be not offend , natur 's miracl , 
 thou art allot to be ta'en by me . 
 so doth the swan her downi cygnet save , 
 keep them prison underneath her wing . 
 yet , if thi servil usag onc offend , 
 go and be free again as suffolk 's friend . [ she is go ] 
 o , stay ! [ asid ] i have no power to let her pass ; 
 my hand would free her , but my heart say no . 
 as play the sun upon the glassi stream , 
 twinkl anoth counterfeit beam , 
 so seem thi gorgeou beauti to mine eye . 
 fain would i woo her , yet i dare not speak . 
 i 'll call for pen and ink , and write my mind . 
 fie , de la pole ! disabl not thyself ; 
 hast not a tongu ? is she not here thi prison ? 
 wilt thou be daunt at a woman 's sight ? 
 ay , beauti 's princ majesti is such 
 confound the tongu and make the sens rough . 
 margaret . say , earl of suffolk , if thi name be so , 
 what ransom must i pay befor i pass ? 
 for i perceiv i am thi prison . 
 suffolk . [ asid ] how canst thou tell she will deni thi 
 suit , 
 befor thou make a trial of her love ? 
 margaret . whi speak'st thou not ? what ransom must i 
 pay ? 
 suffolk . [ asid ] she 's beauti , and therefor to be woo 'd ; 
 she is a woman , therefor to be won . 
 margaret . wilt thou accept of ransom-yea or no ? 
 suffolk . [ asid ] fond man , rememb that thou hast a 
 wife ; 
 then how can margaret be thi paramour ? 
 margaret . i were best leav him , for he will not hear . 
 suffolk . [ asid ] there all is marr 'd ; there lie a cool 
 card . 
 margaret . he talk at random ; sure , the man is mad . 
 suffolk . [ asid ] and yet a dispens may be had . 
 margaret . and yet i would that you would answer me . 
 suffolk . [ asid ] i 'll win thi ladi margaret . for whom ? 
 whi , for my king ! tush , that 's a wooden thing ! 
 margaret . he talk of wood . it is some carpent . 
 suffolk . [ asid ] yet so my fanci may be satisfi , 
 and peac establish between these realm . 
 but there remain a scrupl in that too ; 
 for though her father be the king of napl , 
 duke of anjou and main , yet is he poor , 
 and our nobil will scorn the match . 
 margaret . hear ye , captain-ar you not at leisur ? 
 suffolk . [ asid ] it shall be so , disdain they ne'er so much . 
 henri is youth , and will quickli yield . 
 madam , i have a secret to reveal . 
 margaret . [ asid ] what though i be enthral 'd ? he seem 
 a knight , 
 and will not ani way dishonour me . 
 suffolk . ladi , vouchsaf to listen what i say . 
 margaret . [ asid ] perhap i shall be rescu 'd by the french ; 
 and then i need not crave hi courtesi . 
 suffolk . sweet madam , give me hear in a caus 
 margaret . [ asid ] tush ! women have been captiv ere 
 now . 
 suffolk . ladi , wherefor talk you so ? 
 margaret . i cri you merci , 't is but quid for quo . 
 suffolk . say , gentl princess , would you not suppos 
 your bondag happi , to be made a queen ? 
 margaret . to be a queen in bondag is more vile 
 than is a slave in base servil ; 
 for princ should be free . 
 suffolk . and so shall you , 
 if happi england 's royal king be free . 
 margaret . whi , what concern hi freedom unto me ? 
 suffolk . i 'll undertak to make thee henri 's queen , 
 to put a golden sceptr in thi hand 
 and set a preciou crown upon thi head , 
 if thou wilt condescend to be my- 
 margaret . what ? 
 suffolk . hi love . 
 margaret . i am unworthi to be henri 's wife . 
 suffolk . no , gentl madam ; i unworthi am 
 to woo so fair a dame to be hi wife 
 and have no portion in the choic myself . 
 how say you , madam ? are ye so content ? 
 margaret . an if my father pleas , i am content . 
 suffolk . then call our captain and our colour forth ! 
 and , madam , at your father 's castl wall 
 we 'll crave a parley to confer with him . 
 
 sound a parley . enter reignier on the wall 
 
 see , reignier , see , thi daughter prison ! 
 reignier . to whom ? 
 suffolk . to me . 
 reignier . suffolk , what remedi ? 
 i am a soldier and unapt to weep 
 or to exclaim on fortun 's fickl . 
 suffolk . ye , there is remedi enough , my lord . 
 consent , and for thi honour give consent , 
 thi daughter shall be wed to my king , 
 whom i with pain have woo 'd and won thereto ; 
 and thi her easy-held imprison 
 hath gain 'd thi daughter princ liberti . 
 reignier . speak suffolk as he think ? 
 suffolk . fair margaret know 
 that suffolk doth not flatter , face , or feign . 
 reignier . upon thi princ warrant i descend 
 to give thee answer of thi just demand . 
 exit reignier from the wall 
 suffolk . and here i will expect thi come . 
 
 trumpet sound . enter reignier below 
 
 reignier . welcom , brave earl , into our territori ; 
 command in anjou what your honour pleas . 
 suffolk . thank , reignier , happi for so sweet a child , 
 fit to be made companion with a king . 
 what answer make your grace unto my suit ? 
 reignier . sinc thou dost deign to woo her littl worth 
 to be the princ bride of such a lord , 
 upon condit i may quietli 
 enjoy mine own , the countri main and anjou , 
 free from oppress or the stroke of war , 
 my daughter shall be henri 's , if he pleas . 
 suffolk . that is her ransom ; i deliv her . 
 and those two counti i will undertak 
 your grace shall well and quietli enjoy . 
 reignier . and i again , in henri 's royal name , 
 as deputi unto that graciou king , 
 give thee her hand for sign of plight faith . 
 suffolk . reignier of franc , i give thee kingli thank , 
 becaus thi is in traffic of a king . 
 [ asid ] and yet , methink , i could be well content 
 to be mine own attorney in thi case . 
 i 'll over then to england with thi news , 
 and make thi marriag to be solemniz 'd . 
 so , farewel , reignier . set thi diamond safe 
 in golden palac , as it becom . 
 reignier . i do embrac thee as i would embrac 
 the christian princ , king henri , were he here . 
 margaret . farewel , my lord . good wish , prais , and 
 prayer , 
 shall suffolk ever have of margaret . [ she is go ] 
 suffolk . farewel , sweet madam . but hark you , margaret 
 no princ commend to my king ? 
 margaret . such commend as becom a maid , 
 a virgin , and hi servant , say to him . 
 suffolk . word sweetli plac 'd and modestli direct . 
 but , madam , i must troubl you again 
 no love token to hi majesti ? 
 margaret . ye , my good lord : a pure unspot heart , 
 never yet taint with love , i send the king . 
 suffolk . and thi withal . [ kiss her ] 
 margaret . that for thyself , i will not so presum 
 to send such peevish token to a king . 
 exeunt reignier and margaret 
 suffolk . o , wert thou for myself ! but , suffolk , stay ; 
 thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth : 
 there minotaur and ugli treason lurk . 
 solicit henri with her wondrou prais . 
 bethink thee on her virtu that surmount , 
 and natur grace that extinguish art ; 
 repeat their semblanc often on the sea , 
 that , when thou com'st to kneel at henri 's feet , 
 thou mayst bereav him of hi wit with wonder . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 camp of the duke of york in anjou 
 
 enter york , warwick , and other 
 york . bring forth that sorceress , condemn 'd to burn . 
 
 enter la pucel , guard , and a shepherd 
 
 shepherd . ah , joan , thi kill thi father 's heart outright ! 
 have i sought everi countri far and near , 
 and , now it is my chanc to find thee out , 
 must i behold thi timeless cruel death ? 
 ah , joan , sweet daughter joan , i 'll die with thee ! 
 pucel . decrepit miser ! base ignobl wretch ! 
 i am descend of a gentler blood ; 
 thou art no father nor no friend of mine . 
 shepherd . out , out ! my lord , an pleas you , 't is not so ; 
 i did beget her , all the parish know . 
 her mother liveth yet , can testifi 
 she wa the first fruit of my bach'lorship . 
 warwick . graceless , wilt thou deni thi parentag ? 
 york . thi argu what her kind of life hath been- 
 wick and vile ; and so her death conclud . 
 shepherd . fie , joan , that thou wilt be so obstacl ! 
 god know thou art a collop of my flesh ; 
 and for thi sake have i shed mani a tear . 
 deni me not , i prithe , gentl joan . 
 pucel . peasant , avaunt ! you have suborn 'd thi man 
 of purpos to obscur my nobl birth . 
 shepherd . 't is true , i gave a nobl to the priest 
 the morn that i wa wed to her mother . 
 kneel down and take my bless , good my girl . 
 wilt thou not stoop ? now curs be the time 
 of thi nativ . i would the milk 
 thi mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast 
 had been a littl ratsban for thi sake . 
 or els , when thou didst keep my lamb afield , 
 i wish some raven wolf had eaten thee . 
 dost thou deni thi father , curs drab ? 
 o , burn her , burn her ! hang is too good . exit 
 york . take her away ; for she hath liv 'd too long , 
 to fill the world with viciou qualiti . 
 pucel . first let me tell you whom you have condemn 'd : 
 not me begotten of a shepherd swain , 
 but issu from the progeni of king ; 
 virtuou and holi , chosen from abov 
 by inspir of celesti grace , 
 to work exceed miracl on earth . 
 i never had to do with wick spirit . 
 but you , that are pollut with your lust , 
 stain 'd with the guiltless blood of innoc , 
 corrupt and taint with a thousand vice , 
 becaus you want the grace that other have , 
 you judg it straight a thing imposs 
 to compass wonder but by help of devil . 
 no , misconceiv ! joan of arc hath been 
 a virgin from her tender infanc , 
 chast and immacul in veri thought ; 
 whose maiden blood , thu rigor effu 'd , 
 will cri for vengeanc at the gate of heaven . 
 york . ay , ay . away with her to execut ! 
 warwick . and hark ye , sir ; becaus she is a maid , 
 spare for no fagot , let there be enow . 
 place barrel of pitch upon the fatal stake , 
 that so her tortur may be shorten . 
 pucel . will noth turn your unrel heart ? 
 then , joan , discov thine infirm 
 that warranteth by law to be thi privileg : 
 i am with child , ye bloodi homicid ; 
 murder not then the fruit within my womb , 
 although ye hale me to a violent death . 
 york . now heaven forfend ! the holi maid with child ! 
 warwick . the greatest miracl that e'er ye wrought : 
 is all your strict precis come to thi ? 
 york . she and the dauphin have been juggl . 
 i did imagin what would be her refug . 
 warwick . well , go to ; we 'll have no bastard live ; 
 especi sinc charl must father it . 
 pucel . you are deceiv 'd ; my child is none of hi : 
 it wa alencon that enjoy 'd my love . 
 york . alencon , that notori machiavel ! 
 it die , an if it had a thousand live . 
 pucel . o , give me leav , i have delud you . 
 't wa neither charl nor yet the duke i nam 'd , 
 but reignier , king of napl , that prevail 'd . 
 warwick . a marri man ! that 's most intoler . 
 york . whi , here 's a girl ! i think she know not well 
 there were so many-whom she may accus . 
 warwick . it 's sign she hath been liber and free . 
 york . and yet , forsooth , she is a virgin pure . 
 strumpet , thi word condemn thi brat and thee . 
 use no entreati , for it is in vain . 
 pucel . then lead me hence-with whom i leav my 
 curs : 
 may never gloriou sun reflex hi beam 
 upon the countri where you make abod ; 
 but dark and the gloomi shade of death 
 environ you , till mischief and despair 
 drive you to break your neck or hang yourselv ! 
 exit , guard 
 york . break thou in piec and consum to ash , 
 thou foul accurs minist of hell ! 
 
 enter cardin beaufort , attend 
 
 cardin . lord regent , i do greet your excel 
 with letter of commiss from the king . 
 for know , my lord , the state of christendom , 
 mov 'd with remors of these outrag broil , 
 have earnestli implor 'd a gener peac 
 betwixt our nation and the aspir french ; 
 and here at hand the dauphin and hi train 
 approacheth , to confer about some matter . 
 york . is all our travail turn 'd to thi effect ? 
 after the slaughter of so mani peer , 
 so mani captain , gentlemen , and soldier , 
 that in thi quarrel have been overthrown 
 and sold their bodi for their countri 's benefit , 
 shall we at last conclud effemin peac ? 
 have we not lost most part of all the town , 
 by treason , falsehood , and by treacheri , 
 our great progenitor had conquer ? 
 o warwick , warwick ! i forese with grief 
 the utter loss of all the realm of franc . 
 warwick . be patient , york . if we conclud a peac , 
 it shall be with such strict and sever coven 
 as littl shall the frenchmen gain therebi . 
 
 enter charl , alencon , bastard , reignier , and other 
 
 charl . sinc , lord of england , it is thu agre 
 that peac truce shall be proclaim 'd in franc , 
 we come to be inform by yourselv 
 what the condit of that leagu must be . 
 york . speak , winchest ; for boil choler choke 
 the hollow passag of my poison 'd voic , 
 by sight of these our bale enemi . 
 cardin . charl , and the rest , it is enact thu : 
 that , in regard king henri give consent , 
 of mere compass and of leniti , 
 to eas your countri of distress war , 
 an suffer you to breath in fruit peac , 
 you shall becom true liegemen to hi crown ; 
 and , charl , upon condit thou wilt swear 
 to pay him tribut and submit thyself , 
 thou shalt be plac 'd as viceroy under him , 
 and still enjoy thi regal digniti . 
 alencon . must he be then as shadow of himself ? 
 adorn hi templ with a coronet 
 and yet , in substanc and author , 
 retain but privileg of a privat man ? 
 thi proffer is absurd and reasonless . 
 charl . 't is known alreadi that i am possess 'd 
 with more than half the gallian territori , 
 and therein reverenc 'd for their law king . 
 shall i , for lucr of the rest unvanquish 'd , 
 detract so much from that prerog 
 as to be call 'd but viceroy of the whole ? 
 no , lord ambassador ; i 'll rather keep 
 that which i have than , covet for more , 
 be cast from possibl of all . 
 york . insult charl ! hast thou by secret mean 
 us 'd intercess to obtain a leagu , 
 and now the matter grow to compromis 
 stand'st thou aloof upon comparison ? 
 either accept the titl thou usurp'st , 
 of benefit proceed from our king 
 and not of ani challeng of desert , 
 or we will plagu thee with incess war . 
 reignier . [ to charl ] my lord , you do not well in 
 obstinaci 
 to cavil in the cours of thi contract . 
 if onc it be neglect , ten to one 
 we shall not find like opportun . 
 alencon . [ to charl ] to say the truth , it is your polici 
 to save your subject from such massacr 
 and ruthless slaughter as are daili seen 
 by our proceed in hostil ; 
 and therefor take thi compact of a truce , 
 although you break it when your pleasur serv . 
 warwick . how say'st thou , charl ? shall our condit 
 stand ? 
 charl . it shall ; 
 onli reserv 'd , you claim no interest 
 in ani of our town of garrison . 
 york . then swear allegi to hi majesti : 
 as thou art knight , never to disobey 
 nor be rebelli to the crown of england 
 thou , nor thi nobl , to the crown of england . 
 [ charl and the rest give token of fealti ] 
 so , now dismiss your armi when ye pleas ; 
 hang up your ensign , let your drum be still , 
 for here we entertain a solemn peac . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter suffolk , in confer with the king , 
 gloucest and exet 
 
 king henri . your wondrou rare descript , nobl earl , 
 of beauteou margaret hath astonish 'd me . 
 her virtu , grace with extern gift , 
 do breed love 's settl passion in my heart ; 
 and like as rigour of tempestu gust 
 provok the mightiest hulk against the tide , 
 so am i driven by breath of her renown 
 either to suffer shipwreck or arriv 
 where i may have fruition of her love . 
 suffolk . tush , my good lord ! thi superfici tale 
 is but a prefac of her worthi prais . 
 the chief perfect of that love dame , 
 had i suffici skill to utter them , 
 would make a volum of entic line , 
 abl to ravish ani dull conceit ; 
 and , which is more , she is not so divin , 
 so full-replet with choic of all delight , 
 but with as humbl lowli of mind 
 she is content to be at your command 
 command , i mean , of virtuou intent , 
 to love and honour henri as her lord . 
 king henri . and otherwis will henri ne'er presum . 
 therefor , my lord protector , give consent 
 that margaret may be england 's royal queen . 
 gloucest . so should i give consent to flatter sin . 
 you know , my lord , your high is betroth 'd 
 unto anoth ladi of esteem . 
 how shall we then dispens with that contract , 
 and not defac your honour with reproach ? 
 suffolk . as doth a ruler with unlaw oath ; 
 or one that at a triumph , have vow 'd 
 to tri hi strength , forsaketh yet the list 
 by reason of hi adversari 's odd : 
 a poor earl 's daughter is unequ odd , 
 and therefor may be broke without offenc . 
 gloucest . whi , what , i pray , is margaret more than 
 that ? 
 her father is no better than an earl , 
 although in gloriou titl he excel . 
 suffolk . ye , my lord , her father is a king , 
 the king of napl and jerusalem ; 
 and of such great author in franc 
 as hi allianc will confirm our peac , 
 and keep the frenchmen in allegi . 
 gloucest . and so the earl of armagnac may do , 
 becaus he is near kinsman unto charl . 
 exet . besid , hi wealth doth warrant a liber dower ; 
 where reignier sooner will receiv than give . 
 suffolk . a dow ' r , my lord ! disgrac not so your king , 
 that he should be so abject , base , and poor , 
 to choos for wealth and not for perfect love . 
 henri is abl to enrich hi queen , 
 and not to seek a queen to make him rich . 
 so worthless peasant bargain for their wive , 
 as market-men for oxen , sheep , or hors . 
 marriag is a matter of more worth 
 than to be dealt in by attorneyship ; 
 not whom we will , but whom hi grace affect , 
 must be companion of hi nuptial bed . 
 and therefor , lord , sinc he affect her most , 
 it most of all these reason bindeth us 
 in our opinion she should be preferr 'd ; 
 for what is wedlock forc but a hell , 
 an age of discord and continu strife ? 
 wherea the contrari bringeth bliss , 
 and is a pattern of celesti peac . 
 whom should we match with henri , be a king , 
 but margaret , that is daughter to a king ? 
 her peerless featur , join with her birth , 
 approv her fit for none but for a king ; 
 her valiant courag and undaunt spirit , 
 more than in women commonli is seen , 
 will answer our hope in issu of a king ; 
 for henri , son unto a conqueror , 
 is like to beget more conqueror , 
 if with a ladi of so high resolv 
 as is fair margaret he be link 'd in love . 
 then yield , my lord ; and here conclud with me 
 that margaret shall be queen , and none but she . 
 king henri . whether it be through forc of your report , 
 my nobl lord of suffolk , or for that 
 my tender youth wa never yet attaint 
 with ani passion of inflam love , 
 i can not tell ; but thi i am assur 'd , 
 i feel such sharp dissens in my breast , 
 such fierc alarum both of hope and fear , 
 as i am sick with work of my thought . 
 take therefor ship ; post , my lord , to franc ; 
 agre to ani coven ; and procur 
 that ladi margaret do vouchsaf to come 
 to cross the sea to england , and be crown 'd 
 king henri 's faith and anoint queen . 
 for your expens and suffici charg , 
 among the peopl gather up a tenth . 
 be gone , i say ; for till you do return 
 i rest perplex with a thousand care . 
 and you , good uncl , banish all offenc : 
 if you do censur me by what you were , 
 not what you are , i know it will excus 
 thi sudden execut of my will . 
 and so conduct me where , from compani , 
 i may revolv and rumin my grief . exit 
 gloucest . ay , grief , i fear me , both at first and last . 
 exeunt gloucest and exet 
 suffolk . thu suffolk hath prevail 'd ; and thu he goe , 
 as did the youth pari onc to greec , 
 with hope to find the like event in love 
 but prosper better than the troyan did . 
 margaret shall now be queen , and rule the king ; 
 but i will rule both her , the king , and realm . exit 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the second part of king henri the sixth 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 king henri the fourth . 
 henri , princ of wale , son to the king . 
 princ john of lancast , son to the king . 
 earl of westmoreland . 
 sir walter blunt . 
 thoma perci , earl of worcest . 
 henri perci , earl of northumberland . 
 henri perci , surnam hotspur , hi son . 
 edmund mortim , earl of march . 
 richard scroop , archbishop of york . 
 archibald , earl of dougla . 
 owen glendow . 
 sir richard vernon . 
 sir john falstaff . 
 sir michael , a friend to the archbishop of york . 
 poin . 
 gadshil 
 peto . 
 bardolph . 
 
 ladi perci , wife to hotspur , and sister to mortim . 
 ladi mortim , daughter to glendow , and wife to mortim . 
 mistress quickli , hostess of the boar 's head in eastcheap . 
 
 lord , offic , sheriff , vintner , chamberlain , drawer , two 
 carrier , travel , and attend . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene. -- england and wale . 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 london . the palac . 
 
 enter the king , lord john of lancast , earl of westmoreland , 
 [ sir walter blunt , ] with other . 
 
 king . so shaken as we are , so wan with care , 
 find we a time for fright peac to pant 
 and breath short-wind accent of new broil 
 to be commenc 'd in strond afar remot . 
 no more the thirsti entranc of thi soil 
 shall daub her lip with her own children 's blood . 
 no more shall trench war channel her field , 
 nor bruis her flow'ret with the arm hoof 
 of hostil pace . those oppos eye 
 which , like the meteor of a troubl heaven , 
 all of one natur , of one substanc bred , 
 did late meet in the intestin shock 
 and furiou close of civil butcheri , 
 shall now in mutual well-beseem rank 
 march all one way and be no more oppo 'd 
 against acquaint , kindr , and alli . 
 the edg of war , like an ill-sheath knife , 
 no more shall cut hi master . therefor , friend , 
 as far as to the sepulchr of christ- 
 whose soldier now , under whose bless cross 
 we are impress and engag 'd to fight- 
 forthwith a power of english shall we levi , 
 whose arm were mould in their mother 's womb 
 to chase these pagan in those holi field 
 over whose acr walk 'd those bless feet 
 which fourteen hundr year ago were nail 'd 
 for our advantag on the bitter cross . 
 but thi our purpos now is twelvemonth old , 
 and bootless 't is to tell you we will go . 
 therefor we meet not now . then let me hear 
 of you , my gentl cousin westmoreland , 
 what yesternight our council did decre 
 in forward thi dear expedi . 
 west . my lieg , thi hast wa hot in question 
 and mani limit of the charg set down 
 but yesternight ; when all athwart there came 
 a post from wale , loaden with heavi news ; 
 whose worst wa that the nobl mortim , 
 lead the men of herefordshir to fight 
 against the irregular and wild glendow , 
 wa by the rude hand of that welshman taken , 
 a thousand of hi peopl butcher ; 
 upon whose dead corps there wa such misus , 
 such beastli shameless transform , 
 by those welshwomen done as may not be 
 without much shame retold or spoken of . 
 king . it seem then that the tide of thi broil 
 brake off our busi for the holi land . 
 west . thi , match 'd with other , did , my graciou lord ; 
 for more uneven and unwelcom news 
 came from the north , and thu it did import : 
 on holy-rood day the gallant hotspur there , 
 young harri perci , and brave archibald , 
 that ever-vali and approv scot , 
 at holmedon met , 
 where they did spend a sad and bloodi hour ; 
 as by discharg of their artilleri 
 and shape of likelihood the news wa told ; 
 for he that brought them , in the veri heat 
 and pride of their content did take hors , 
 uncertain of the issu ani way . 
 king . here is a dear , a true-industri friend , 
 sir walter blunt , new light from hi hors , 
 stain 'd with the variat of each soil 
 betwixt that holmedon and thi seat of our , 
 and he hath brought us smooth and welcom news . 
 the earl of dougla is discomfit ; 
 ten thousand bold scot , two-and-twenti knight , 
 balk 'd in their own blood did sir walter see 
 on holmedon 's plain . of prison , hotspur took 
 mordak earl of fife and eldest son 
 to beaten dougla , and the earl of athol , 
 of murray , angu , and menteith . 
 and is not thi an honour spoil ? 
 a gallant prize ? ha , cousin , is it not ? 
 west . in faith , 
 it is a conquest for a princ to boast of . 
 king . yea , there thou mak'st me sad , and mak'st me sin 
 in envi that my lord northumberland 
 should be the father to so blest a son- 
 a son who is the theme of honour 's tongu , 
 amongst a grove the veri straightest plant ; 
 who is sweet fortun 's minion and her pride ; 
 whilst i , by look on the prais of him , 
 see riot and dishonour stain the brow 
 of my young harri . o that it could be prov 'd 
 that some night-trip fairi had exchang 'd 
 in cradl cloth our children where they lay , 
 and call 'd mine perci , hi plantagenet ! 
 then would i have hi harri , and he mine . 
 but let him from my thought . what think you , coz , 
 of thi young perci 's pride ? the prison 
 which he in thi adventur hath surpri 'd 
 to hi own use he keep , and send me word 
 i shall have none but mordak earl of fife . 
 west . thi is hi uncl 's teach , thi worcest , 
 malevol to you in all aspect , 
 which make him prune himself and bristl up 
 the crest of youth against your digniti . 
 king . but i have sent for him to answer thi ; 
 and for thi caus awhil we must neglect 
 our holi purpos to jerusalem . 
 cousin , on wednesday next our council we 
 will hold at windsor . so inform the lord ; 
 but come yourself with speed to us again ; 
 for more is to be said and to be done 
 than out of anger can be utter . 
 west . i will my lieg . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 london . an apart of the princ 's . 
 
 enter princ of wale and sir john falstaff . 
 
 fal . now , hal , what time of day is it , lad ? 
 princ . thou art so fat-wit with drink of old sack , and 
 unbutton thee after supper , and sleep upon bench after 
 noon , that thou hast forgotten to demand that truli which thou 
 wouldest truli know . what a devil hast thou to do with the time 
 of the day , unless hour were cup of sack , and minut capon , 
 and clock the tongu of bawd , and dial the sign of leap 
 hous , and the bless sun himself a fair hot wench in 
 flame-colour taffeta , i see no reason whi thou shouldst be so 
 superflu to demand the time of the day . 
 fal . inde you come near me now , hal ; for we that take purs go 
 by the moon and the seven star , and not by phoebu , he , that 
 wand'r knight so fair . and i prithe , sweet wag , when thou art 
 king , as , god save thi grace-majesti i should say , for grace thou 
 wilt have none- 
 princ . what , none ? 
 fal . no , by my troth ; not so much as will serv to be prologu to 
 an egg and butter . 
 princ . well , how then ? come , roundli , roundli . 
 fal . marri , then , sweet wag , when thou art king , let not us that 
 are squir of the night 's bodi be call thiev of the day 's 
 beauti . let us be diana 's forest , gentlemen of the shade , 
 minion of the moon ; and let men say we be men of good 
 govern , be govern as the sea is , by our nobl and chast 
 mistress the moon , under whose counten we steal . 
 princ . thou sayest well , and it hold well too ; for the fortun of 
 us that are the moon 's men doth ebb and flow like the sea , be 
 govern , as the sea is , by the moon . as , for proof now : a purs 
 of gold most resolut snatch 'd on monday night and most 
 dissolut spent on tuesday morn ; got with swear 'lay by , ' 
 and spent with cri 'bring in ' ; now ill as low an ebb as the 
 foot of the ladder , and by-and-bi in as high a flow as the ridg 
 of the gallow . 
 fal . by the lord , thou say'st true , lad- and is not my hostess of 
 the tavern a most sweet wench ? 
 princ . as the honey of hybla , my old lad of the castle- and is not 
 a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of duranc ? 
 fal . how now , how now , mad wag ? what , in thi quip and thi 
 quidditi ? what a plagu have i to do with a buff jerkin ? 
 princ . whi , what a pox have i to do with my hostess of the tavern ? 
 fal . well , thou hast call 'd her to a reckon mani a time and oft . 
 princ . did i ever call for thee to pay thi part ? 
 fal . no ; i 'll give thee thi due , thou hast paid all there . 
 princ . yea , and elsewher , so far as my coin would stretch ; and 
 where it would not , i have use my credit . 
 fal . yea , and so us 'd it that , were it not here appar that thou 
 art heir apparent- but i prithe , sweet wag , shall there be 
 gallow stand in england when thou art king ? and resolut 
 thu fubb 'd as it is with the rusti curb of old father antic the 
 law ? do not thou , when thou art king , hang a thief . 
 princ . no ; thou shalt . 
 fal . shall i ? o rare ! by the lord , i 'll be a brave judg . 
 princ . thou judgest fals alreadi . i mean , thou shalt have the 
 hang of the thiev and so becom a rare hangman . 
 fal . well , hal , well ; and in some sort it jump with my humour as 
 well as wait in the court , i can tell you . 
 princ . for obtain of suit ? 
 fal . yea , for obtain of suit , whereof the hangman hath no lean 
 wardrob . 'sblood , i am as melancholi as a gib-cat or a lugg 'd 
 bear . 
 princ . or an old lion , or a lover 's lute . 
 fal . yea , or the drone of a lincolnshir bagpip . 
 princ . what sayest thou to a hare , or the melancholi of moor 
 ditch ? 
 fal . thou hast the most unsavouri simil , and art inde the most 
 compar , rascalliest , sweet young princ . but , hal , i prithe 
 troubl me no more with vaniti . i would to god thou and i knew 
 where a commod of good name were to be bought . an old lord of 
 the council rate me the other day in the street about you , sir , 
 but i mark 'd him not ; and yet he talk veri wise , but i 
 regard him not ; and yet he talk 'd wise , and in the street 
 too . 
 princ . thou didst well ; for wisdom cri out in the street , and 
 no man regard it . 
 fal . o , thou hast damnabl iter , and art inde abl to 
 corrupt a saint . thou hast done much harm upon me , hal- god 
 forgiv thee for it ! befor i knew thee , hal , i knew noth ; and 
 now am i , if a man should speak truli , littl better than one of 
 the wick . i must give over thi life , and i will give it over ! 
 by the lord , an i do not , i am a villain ! i 'll be damn 'd for 
 never a king 's son in christendom . 
 princ . where shall we take a purs tomorrow , jack ? 
 fal . zound , where thou wilt , lad ! i 'll make one . an i do not , call 
 me villain and baffl me . 
 princ . i see a good amend of life in thee- from pray to 
 purse-tak . 
 fal . whi , hal , 't is my vocat , hal . 't is no sin for a man to 
 labour in hi vocat . 
 
 enter poin . 
 
 poin ! now shall we know if gadshil have set a match . o , if men 
 were to be save by merit , what hole in hell were hot enough for 
 him ? thi is the most omnipot villain that ever cri 'stand ! ' 
 to a true man . 
 princ . good morrow , ned . 
 poin . good morrow , sweet hal . what say monsieur remors ? what 
 say sir john sack and sugar ? jack , how agre the devil and thee 
 about thi soul , that thou soldest him on good friday last for a 
 cup of madeira and a cold capon 's leg ? 
 princ . sir john stand to hi word , the devil shall have hi 
 bargain ; for he wa never yet a breaker of proverb . he will give 
 the devil hi due . 
 poin . then art thou damn 'd for keep thi word with the devil . 
 princ . els he had been damn 'd for cozen the devil . 
 poin . but , my lad , my lad , to-morrow morn , by four o'clock 
 earli , at gadshil ! there are pilgrim gong to canterburi with 
 rich offer , and trader ride to london with fat purs . i 
 have vizard for you all ; you have hors for yourselv . 
 gadshil lie to-night in rochest . i have bespok supper 
 to-morrow night in eastcheap . we may do it as secur as sleep . if 
 you will go , i will stuff your purs full of crown ; if you will 
 not , tarri at home and be hang 'd ! 
 fal . hear ye , yedward : if i tarri at home and go not , i 'll hang you 
 for go . 
 poin . you will , chop ? 
 fal . hal , wilt thou make one ? 
 princ . who , i rob ? i a thief ? not i , by my faith . 
 fal . there 's neither honesti , manhood , nor good fellowship in thee , 
 nor thou cam'st not of the blood royal if thou darest not stand 
 for ten shill . 
 princ . well then , onc in my day i 'll be a madcap . 
 fal . whi , that 's well said . 
 princ . well , come what will , i 'll tarri at home . 
 fal . by the lord , i 'll be a traitor then , when thou art king . 
 princ . i care not . 
 poin . sir john , i prithe , leav the princ and me alon . i will 
 lay him down such reason for thi adventur that he shall go . 
 fal . well , god give thee the spirit of persuas and him the ear 
 of profit , that what thou speakest may move and what he hear 
 may be believ , that the true princ may ( for recreat sake ) 
 prove a fals thief ; for the poor abus of the time want 
 counten . farewel ; you shall find me in eastcheap . 
 princ . farewel , thou latter spring ! farewel , all-hallown summer ! 
 exit falstaff . 
 poin . now , my good sweet honey lord , ride with us to-morrow . i 
 have a jest to execut that i can not manag alon . falstaff , 
 bardolph , peto , and gadshil shall rob those men that we have 
 alreadi waylaid ; yourself and i will not be there ; and when they 
 have the booti , if you and i do not rob them , cut thi head off 
 from my shoulder . 
 princ . how shall we part with them in set forth ? 
 poin . whi , we will set forth befor or after them and appoint them 
 a place of meet , wherein it is at our pleasur to fail ; and 
 then will they adventur upon the exploit themselv ; which they 
 shall have no sooner achiev , but we 'll set upon them . 
 princ . yea , but 't is like that they will know us by our hors , by 
 our habit , and by everi other appoint , to be ourselv . 
 poin . tut ! our hors they shall not see- i 'll tie them in the 
 wood ; our wizard we will chang after we leav them ; and , 
 sirrah , i have case of buckram for the nonc , to immask our 
 note outward garment . 
 princ . yea , but i doubt they will be too hard for us . 
 poin . well , for two of them , i know them to be as true-br 
 coward as ever turn 'd back ; and for the third , if he fight 
 longer than he see reason , i 'll forswear arm . the virtu of 
 thi jest will lie the incomprehens lie that thi same fat 
 rogu will tell us when we meet at supper : how thirti , at least , 
 he fought with ; what ward , what blow , what extrem he 
 endur ; and in the reproof of thi lie the jest . 
 princ . well , i 'll go with thee . provid us all thing necessari 
 and meet me to-night in eastcheap . there i 'll sup . farewel . 
 poin . farewel , my lord . exit . 
 princ . i know you all , and will awhil uphold 
 the unyok 'd humour of your idl . 
 yet herein will i imit the sun , 
 who doth permit the base contagi cloud 
 to smother up hi beauti from the world , 
 that , when he pleas again to lie himself , 
 be want , he may be more wond'r at 
 by break through the foul and ugli mist 
 of vapour that did seem to strangl him . 
 if all the year were play holiday , 
 to sport would be as tediou as to work ; 
 but when they seldom come , they wish'd-for come , 
 and noth pleaseth but rare accid . 
 so , when thi loos behaviour i throw off 
 and pay the debt i never promis , 
 by how much better than my word i am , 
 by so much shall i falsifi men 's hope ; 
 and , like bright metal on a sullen ground , 
 my reform , glitt'r o'er my fault , 
 shall show more goodli and attract more eye 
 than that which hath no foil to set it off . 
 i 'll so offend to make offenc a skill , 
 redeem time when men think least i will . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 london . the palac . 
 
 enter the king , northumberland , worcest , hotspur , sir walter blunt , 
 with other . 
 
 king . my blood hath been too cold and temper , 
 unapt to stir at these indign , 
 and you have found me , for accordingli 
 you tread upon my patienc ; but be sure 
 i will from henceforth rather be myself , 
 mighti and to be fear 'd , than my condit , 
 which hath been smooth as oil , soft as young down , 
 and therefor lost that titl of respect 
 which the proud soul ne'er pay but to the proud . 
 wor . our hous , my sovereign lieg , littl deserv 
 the scourg of great to be us 'd on it- 
 and that same great too which our own hand 
 have holp to make so portli . 
 north . my lord- 
 king . worcest , get thee gone ; for i do see 
 danger and disobedi in thine eye . 
 o , sir , your presenc is too bold and peremptori , 
 and majesti might never yet endur 
 the moodi frontier of a servant brow . 
 tou have good leav to leav us . when we need 
 'your use and counsel , we shall send for you . 
 exit worcest . 
 you were about to speak . 
 north . yea , my good lord . 
 those prison in your high ' name demand 
 which harri perci here at holmedon took , 
 were , as he say , not with such strength deni 
 as is deliv to your majesti . 
 either envi , therefor , or mispris 
 is guilti of thi fault , and not my son . 
 hot . my lieg , i did deni no prison . 
 but i rememb , when the fight wa done , 
 when i wa dri with rage and extrem toll , 
 breathless and faint , lean upon my sword , 
 came there a certain lord , neat and trimli dress 'd , 
 fresh as a bridegroom ; and hi chin new reap 'd 
 show 'd like a stubbl land at harvest home . 
 he wa perfum like a millin , 
 and 'twixt hi finger and hi thumb he held 
 a pouncet box , which ever and anon 
 he gave hi nose , and took't away again ; 
 who therewith angri , when it next came there , 
 took it in snuff ; and still he smil 'd and talk 'd ; 
 and as the soldier bore dead bodi by , 
 he call 'd them untaught knave , unmannerli , 
 to bring a slovenli unhandsom cors 
 betwixt the wind and hi nobil . 
 with mani holiday and ladi term 
 he question me , amongst the rest demand 
 my prison in your majesti 's behalf . 
 i then , all smart with my wound be cold , 
 to be so pest'r with a popingay , 
 out of my grief and my impati 
 answer 'd neglectingli , i know not what- 
 he should , or he should not ; for he made me mad 
 to see him shine so brisk , and smell so sweet , 
 and talk so like a wait gentlewoman 
 of gun and drum and wounds- god save the mark ! - 
 and tell me the sovereignest thing on earth 
 wa parmac for an inward bruis ; 
 and that it wa great piti , so it wa , 
 thi villan saltpetr should be digg 'd 
 out of the bowel of the harmless earth , 
 which mani a good tall fellow had destroy 'd 
 so cowardli ; and but for these vile 'gun , 
 he would himself have been a soldier . 
 thi bald unjoint chat of hi , my lord , 
 i answer indirectli , as i said , 
 and i beseech you , let not hi report 
 come current for an accus 
 betwixt my love and your high majesti . 
 blunt . the circumst consid , good my lord , 
 whate' lord harri perci then had said 
 to such a person , and in such a place , 
 at such a time , with all the rest retold , 
 may reason die , and never rise 
 to do him wrong , or ani way impeach 
 what then he said , so he unsay it now . 
 king . whi , yet he doth deni hi prison , 
 but with proviso and except , 
 that we at our own charg shall ransom straight 
 hi brother-in-law , the foolish mortim ; 
 who , on my soul , hath wil betray 'd 
 the live of those that he did lead to fight 
 against that great magician , damn 'd glendow , 
 whose daughter , as we hear , the earl of march 
 hath late marri . shall our coffer , then , 
 be empti to redeem a traitor home ? 
 shall we buy treason ? and indent with fear 
 when they have lost and forfeit themselv ? 
 no , on the barren mountain let him starv ! 
 for i shall never hold that man my friend 
 whose tongu shall ask me for one penni cost 
 to ransom home revolt mortim . 
 hot . revolt mortim ? 
 he never did fall off , my sovereign lieg , 
 but by the chanc of war . to prove that true 
 need no more but one tongu for all those wound , 
 those mouth wound , which valiantli he took 
 when on the gentl severn 's sedgi bank , 
 in singl opposit hand to hand , 
 he did confound the best part of an hour 
 in chang hardiment with great glendow . 
 three time they breath 'd , and three time did they drink , 
 upon agreement , of swift severn 's flood ; 
 who then , affright with their bloodi look , 
 ran fear among the trembl reed 
 and hid hi crisp head in the hollow bank , 
 bloodstain with these valiant cohabit . 
 never did base and rotten polici 
 colour her work with such deadli wound ; 
 nor never could the nobl mortim 
 receiv so mani , and all willingli . 
 then let not him be slander with revolt . 
 king . thou dost beli him , perci , thou dost beli him ! 
 he never did encount with glendow . 
 i tell thee 
 he durst as well have met the devil alon 
 as owen glendow for an enemi . 
 art thou not asham 'd ? but , sirrah , henceforth 
 let me not hear you speak of mortim . 
 send me your prison with the speediest mean , 
 or you shall hear in such a kind from me 
 as will displeas you . my lord northumberland , 
 we licens your departur with your son.- 
 send us your prison , or you will hear of it . 
 exeunt king , [ blunt , and train ] 
 hot . an if the devil come and roar for them , 
 i will not send them . i will after straight 
 and tell him so ; for i will els my heart , 
 albeit i make a hazard of my head . 
 north . what , drunk with choler ? stay , and paus awhil . 
 here come your uncl . 
 
 enter worcest . 
 
 hot . speak of mortim ? 
 zound , i will speak of him , and let my soul 
 want merci if i do not join with him ! 
 yea , on hi part i 'll empti all these vein , 
 and shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust , 
 but i will lift the downtrod mortim 
 as high in the air as thi unthank king , 
 as thi ingrat and cank'r bolingbrok . 
 north . brother , the king hath made your nephew mad . 
 wor . who struck thi heat up after i wa gone ? 
 hot . he will ( forsooth ) have all my prison ; 
 and when i urg 'd the ransom onc again 
 of my wive 's brother , then hi cheek look 'd pale , 
 and on my face he turn 'd an eye of death , 
 trembl even at the name of mortim . 
 wor . i can not blame him . wa not he proclaim 'd 
 by richard that dead is , the next of blood ? 
 north . he wa ; i heard the proclam . 
 and then it wa when the unhappi king 
 ( whose wrong in us god pardon ! ) did set forth 
 upon hi irish expedit ; 
 from whenc he intercept did return 
 to be depo 'd , and shortli murder . 
 wor . and for whose death we in the world 's wide mouth 
 live scandaliz 'd and foulli spoken of . 
 hot . but soft , i pray you . did king richard then 
 proclaim my brother edmund mortim 
 heir to the crown ? 
 north . he did ; myself did hear it . 
 hot . nay , then i can not blame hi cousin king , 
 that wish 'd him on the barren mountain starv . 
 but shall it be that you , that set the crown 
 upon the head of thi forget man , 
 and for hi sake wear the detest blot 
 of murther subornation- shall it be 
 that you a world of curs undergo , 
 be the agent or base second mean , 
 the cord , the ladder , or the hangman rather ? 
 o , pardon me that i descend so low 
 to show the line and the predica 
 wherein you rang under thi subtil king ! 
 shall it for shame be spoken in these day , 
 or fill up chronicl in time to come , 
 that men of your nobil and power 
 did gage them both in an unjust behalf 
 ( as both of you , god pardon it ! have done ) 
 to put down richard , that sweet love rose , 
 and plant thi thorn , thi canker , bolingbrok ? 
 and shall it in more shame be further spoken 
 that you are fool 'd , discard , and shook off 
 by him for whom these shame ye underw ? 
 no ! yet time serv wherein you may redeem 
 your banish 'd honour and restor yourselv 
 into the good thought of the world again ; 
 reveng the jeer and disdain 'd contempt 
 of thi proud king , who studi day and night 
 to answer all the debt he owe to you 
 even with the bloodi payment of your death . 
 therefor i say- 
 wor . peac , cousin , say no more ; 
 and now , i will unclasp a secret book , 
 and to your quick-conceiv discont 
 i 'll read you matter deep and danger , 
 as full of peril and adventur spirit 
 as to o'erwalk a current roar loud 
 on the unsteadfast foot of a spear . 
 hot . if he fall in , good night , or sink or swim ! 
 send danger from the east unto the west , 
 so honour cross it from the north to south , 
 and let them grappl . o , the blood more stir 
 to rous a lion than to start a hare ! 
 north . imagin of some great exploit 
 drive him beyond the bound of patienc . 
 hot . by heaven , methink it were an easi leap 
 to pluck bright honour from the pale-fac 'd moon , 
 or dive into the bottom of the deep , 
 where fadom line could never touch the ground , 
 and pluck up drown honour by the lock , 
 so he that doth redeem her thenc might wear 
 without corriv all her digniti ; 
 but out upon thi half-fac 'd fellowship ! 
 wor . he apprehend a world of figur here , 
 but not the form of what he should attend . 
 good cousin , give me audienc for a while . 
 hot . i cri you merci . 
 wor . those same nobl scot 
 that are your prisoners- 
 hot . i 'll keep them all . 
 by god , he shall not have a scot of them ! 
 no , if a scot would save hi soul , he shall not . 
 i 'll keep them , by thi hand ! 
 wor . you start away . 
 and lend no ear unto my purpos . 
 those prison you shall keep . 
 hot . nay , i will ! that is flat ! 
 he said he would not ransom mortim , 
 forbad my tongu to speak of mortim , 
 but i will find him when he lie asleep , 
 and in hi ear i 'll holloa 'mortim . ' 
 nay ; 
 i 'll have a starl shall be taught to speak 
 noth but 'mortim , ' and give it him 
 to keep hi anger still in motion . 
 wor . hear you , cousin , a word . 
 hot . all studi here i solemnli defi 
 save how to gall and pinch thi bolingbrok ; 
 and that same sword-and-buckl princ of wales- 
 but that i think hi father love him not 
 and would be glad he met with some mischanc , 
 i would have him poison with a pot of ale . 
 wor . farewel , kinsman . i will talk to you 
 when you are better temper 'd to attend . 
 north . whi , what a wasp-stung and impati fool 
 art thou to break into thi woman 's mood , 
 tie thine ear to no tongu but thine own ! 
 hot . whi , look you , i am whipp 'd and scourg 'd with rod , 
 nettl , and stung with pismir when i hear 
 of thi vile politician , bolingbrok . 
 in richard 's time- what do you call the place- 
 a plagu upon it ! it is in gioucestershire- 
 't wa where the madcap duke hi uncl kept- 
 hi uncl york- where i first bow 'd my knee 
 unto thi king of smile , thi bolingbroke- 
 's blood ! 
 when you and he came back from ravenspurgh- 
 north . at berkeley castl . 
 hot . you say true . 
 whi , what a candi deal of courtesi 
 thi fawn greyhound then did proffer me ! 
 look , 'when hi infant fortun came to age , ' 
 and 'gentl harri perci , ' and 'kind cousin'- 
 o , the devil take such cozen ! - god forgiv me ! 
 good uncl , tell your tale , for i have done . 
 wor . nay , if you have not , to it again . 
 we will stay your leisur . 
 hot . i have done , i ' faith . 
 wor . then onc more to your scottish prison . 
 deliv them up without their ransom straight , 
 and make the dougla ' son your onli mean 
 for power in scotland ; which , for diver reason 
 which i shall send you written , be assur 'd 
 will easili be grant . [ to northumberland ] you , my lord , 
 your son in scotland be thu employ 'd , 
 shall secretli into the bosom creep 
 of that same nobl prelat well-belov 'd , 
 the archbishop . 
 hot . of york , is it not ? 
 wor . true ; who bear hard 
 hi brother 's death at bristow , the lord scroop . 
 i speak not thi in estim , 
 as what i think might be , but what i know 
 is rumin , plot , and set down , 
 and onli stay but to behold the face 
 of that occas that shall bring it on . 
 hot . i smell it . upon my life , it will do well . 
 north . befor the game is afoot thou still let'st slip . 
 hot . whi , it can not choos but be a nobl plot . 
 and then the power of scotland and of york 
 to join with mortim , ha ? 
 wor . and so they shall . 
 hot . in faith , it is exceedingli well aim 'd . 
 wor . and 't is no littl reason bid us speed , 
 to save our head by rais of a head ; 
 for , bear ourselv as even as we can , 
 the king will alway think him in our debt , 
 and think we think ourselv unsatisfi , 
 till he hath found a time to pay us home . 
 and see alreadi how he doth begin 
 to make us stranger to hi look of love . 
 hot . he doe , he doe ! we 'll be reveng 'd on him . 
 wor . cousin , farewel . no further go in thi 
 than i by letter shall direct your cours . 
 when time is ripe , which will be suddenli , 
 i 'll steal to glendow and lord mortim , 
 where you and dougla , and our pow'r at onc , 
 as i will fashion it , shall happili meet , 
 to bear our fortun in our own strong arm , 
 which now we hold at much uncertainti . 
 north . farewel , good brother . we shall thrive , i trust . 
 hot . uncl , adieu . o , let the hour be short 
 till field and blow and groan applaud our sport ! exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 rochest . an inn yard . 
 
 enter a carrier with a lantern in hi hand . 
 
 < num > . car . heigh-ho ! an it be not four by the day , i 'll be hang 'd . 
 charl ' wain is over the new chimney , and yet our hors not 
 pack'd.- what , ostler ! 
 ost . [ within ] anon , anon . 
 < num > . car . i prithe , tom , beat cut 's saddl , put a few flock in the 
 point . poor jade is wrung in the wither out of all cess . 
 
 enter anoth carrier . 
 
 < num > . car . pea and bean are as dank here as a dog , and that is the 
 next way to give poor jade the bot . thi hous is turn upsid 
 down sinc robin ostler die . 
 < num > . car . poor fellow never joy sinc the price of oat rose . it 
 wa the death of him . 
 < num > . car . i think thi be the most villan hous in all london road 
 for flea . i am stung like a tench . 
 < num > . car . like a tench i by the mass , there is ne'er a king christen 
 could be better bit than i have been sinc the first cock . 
 < num > . car . whi , they will allow us ne'er a jordan , and then we leak in 
 your chimney , and your chamber-ly breed flea like a loach . 
 < num > . car . what , ostler ! come away and be hang 'd ! come away ! 
 < num > . car . i have a gammon of bacon and two raze of ginger , to be 
 deliv as far as chare cross . 
 < num > . car . god 's bodi ! the turkey in my pannier are quit starv . 
 what , ostler ! a plagu on thee ! hast thou never an eye in thi 
 head ? canst not hear ? an 'twere not as good deed as drink to 
 break the pate on thee , i am a veri villain . come , and be hang 'd ! 
 hast no faith in thee ? 
 
 enter gadshil . 
 
 gad . good morrow , carrier . what 's o'clock ? 
 < num > . car . i think it be two o'clock . 
 gad . i prithe lend me thi lantern to see my geld in the 
 stabl . 
 < num > . car . nay , by god , soft ! i know a trick worth two of that , 
 i ' faith . 
 gad . i pray thee lend me thine . 
 < num > . car . ay , when ? canst tell ? lend me thi lantern , quoth he ? marri , 
 i 'll see thee hang 'd first ! 
 gad . sirrah carrier , what time do you mean to come to london ? 
 < num > . car . time enough to go to bed with a candl , i warrant thee . 
 come , neighbour mug , we 'll call up the gentlemen . they will 
 along with compani , for they have great charg . 
 exeunt [ carrier ] . 
 gad . what , ho ! chamberlain ! 
 
 enter chamberlain . 
 
 cham . at hand , quoth pickpurs . 
 gad . that 's even as fair as- 'at hand , quoth the chamberlain ' ; for 
 thou variest no more from pick of purs than give direct 
 doth from labour : thou layest the plot how . 
 cham . good morrow , master gadshil . it hold current that i told 
 you yesternight . there 's a franklin in the wild of kent hath 
 brought three hundr mark with him in gold . i heard him tell it 
 to one of hi compani last night at supper- a kind of auditor ; 
 one that hath abund of charg too , god know what . they are 
 up alreadi and call for egg and butter . they will away 
 present . 
 gad . sirrah , if they meet not with saint nichola ' clerk , i 'll 
 give thee thi neck . 
 cham . no , i 'll none of it . i pray thee keep that for the hangman ; 
 for i know thou worshippest saint nichola as truli as a man of 
 falsehood may . 
 gad . what talkest thou to me of the hangman ? if i hang , i 'll make 
 a fat pair of gallow ; for if i hang , old sir john hang with me , 
 and thou knowest he is no starvel . tut ! there are other 
 troyan that thou dream'st not of , the which for sport sake are 
 content to do the profess some grace ; that would ( if matter 
 should be look 'd into ) for their own credit sake make all whole . 
 i am join with no foot land-rak , no long-staff sixpenni 
 striker , none of these mad mustachio purple-hu maltworm ; but 
 with nobil , and tranquil , burgomast and great oney , 
 such as can hold in , such as will strike sooner than speak , and 
 speak sooner than drink , and drink sooner than pray ; and yet , 
 zound , i lie ; for they pray continu to their saint , the 
 commonwealth , or rather , not pray to her , but prey on her , for 
 they ride up and down on her and make her their boot . 
 cham . what , the commonwealth their boot ? will she hold out water 
 in foul way ? 
 gad . she will , she will ! justic hath liquor 'd her . we steal as in 
 a castl , cocksur . we have the receipt of fernse , we walk 
 invis . 
 cham . nay , by my faith , i think you are more behold to the night 
 than to fernse for your walk invis . 
 gad . give me thi hand . thou shalt have a share in our purchas , as 
 i and a true man . 
 cham . nay , rather let me have it , as you are a fals thief . 
 gad . go to ; 'homo ' is a common name to all men . bid the ostler 
 bring my geld out of the stabl . farewel , you muddi knave . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the highway near gadshil . 
 
 enter princ and poin . 
 
 poin . come , shelter , shelter ! i have remov 'd falstaff 's hors , and 
 he fret like a gumm 'd velvet . 
 princ . stand close . [ they step asid . ] 
 
 enter falstaff . 
 
 fal . poin ! poin , and be hang 'd ! poin ! 
 princ . i come forward i peac , ye fat-kidney 'd rascal ! what a 
 brawl dost thou keep ! 
 fal . where 's poin , hal ? 
 princ . he is walk 'd up to the top of the hill . i 'll go seek him . 
 [ step asid . ] 
 fal . i am accur 'd to rob in that thief 's compani . the rascal hath 
 remov my hors and tie him i know not where . if i travel but 
 four foot by the squir further afoot , i shall break my wind . 
 well , i doubt not but to die a fair death for all thi , if i 
 scape hang for kill that rogu . i have forsworn hi compani 
 hourli ani time thi two-and-twenti year , and yet i am bewitch 'd 
 with the rogu 's compani . if the rascal have not given me 
 medicin to make me love him , i 'll be hang 'd . it could not be 
 els . i have drunk medicin . poin ! hal ! a plagu upon you both ! 
 bardolph ! peto ! i 'll starv ere i 'll rob a foot further . an 
 'twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true man and to leav 
 these rogu , i am the veriest varlet that ever chew with a 
 tooth . eight yard of uneven ground is threescor and ten mile 
 afoot with me , and the stony-heart villain know it well 
 enough . a plagu upon it when thiev can not be true one to 
 anoth ! ( they whistl . ) whew ! a plagu upon you all ! give me my 
 hors , you rogu ! give me my hors and be hang 'd ! 
 princ . [ come forward ] peac , ye fat-gut ! lie down , lay thine ear 
 close to the ground , and list if thou canst hear the tread of 
 travel . 
 fal . have you ani lever to lift me up again , be down ? 'sblood , 
 i 'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin 
 in thi father 's exchequ . what a plagu mean ye to colt me thu ? 
 princ . thou liest ; thou art not colt , thou art uncolt . 
 fal . i prithe , good princ hal , help me to my hors , good king 's 
 son . 
 princ . out , ye rogu ! shall i be your ostler ? 
 fal . go hang thyself in thine own heir-appar garter ! if i be 
 ta'en , i 'll peach for thi . an i have not ballad made on you 
 all , and sung to filthi tune , let a cup of sack be my poison . 
 when a jest is so forward- and afoot too- i hate it . 
 
 enter gadshil , [ bardolph and peto with him ] . 
 
 gad . stand ! 
 fal . so i do , against my will . 
 poin . [ come fortward ] o , 't is our setter . i know hi voic . 
 bardolph , what news ? 
 bar . case ye , case ye ! on with your vizard ! there 's money of the 
 king 's come down the hill ; 't is go to the king 's exchequ . 
 fal . you lie , ye rogu ! 't is go to the king 's tavern . 
 gad . there 's enough to make us all . 
 fal . to be hang 'd . 
 princ . sir , you four shall front them in the narrow lane ; ned 
 poin and i will walk lower . if they scape from your encount , 
 then they light on us . 
 peto . how mani be there of them ? 
 gad . some eight or ten . 
 fal . zound , will they not rob us ? 
 princ . what , a coward , sir john paunch ? 
 fal . inde , i am not john of gaunt , your grandfath ; but yet no 
 coward , hal . 
 princ . well , we leav that to the proof . 
 poin . sirrah jack , thi hors stand behind the hedg . when thou 
 need'st him , there thou shalt find him . farewel and stand fast . 
 fal . now can not i strike him , if i should be hang 'd . 
 princ . [ asid to poin ] ned , where are our disguis ? 
 poin . [ asid to princ ] here , hard by . stand close . 
 [ exeunt princ and poin . ] 
 fal . now , my master , happi man be hi dole , say i. everi man to 
 hi busi . 
 
 enter the travel . 
 
 travel . come , neighbour . 
 the boy shall lead our hors down the hill ; 
 we 'll walk afoot awhil and eas our leg . 
 thiev . stand ! 
 travel . jesu bless us ! 
 fal . strike ! down with them ! cut the villain ' throat ! ah , 
 whoreson caterpillar ! bacon-f knave ! they hate us youth . down 
 with them ! fleec them ! 
 travel . o , we are undon , both we and our for ever ! 
 fal . hang ye , gorbelli knave , are ye undon ? no , ye fat chuff ; 
 i would your store were here ! on , bacon on ! what , ye knave ! 
 young men must live . you are grandjuror , are ye ? we 'll jure ye , 
 faith ! 
 here they rob and bind them . exeunt . 
 
 enter the princ and poin [ in buckram suit ] . 
 
 princ . the thiev have bound the true men . now could thou and i 
 rob the thiev and go merrili to london , it would be argument 
 for a week , laughter for a month , and a good jest for ever . 
 poin . stand close ! i hear them come . 
 [ they stand asid . ] 
 
 enter the thiev again . 
 
 fal . come , my master , let us share , and then to hors befor day . 
 an the princ and poin be not two arrant coward , there 's no 
 equiti stir . there 's no more valour in that poin than in a 
 wild duck . 
 
 [ as they are share , the princ and poin set upon 
 them . they all run away , and falstaff , after a blow or 
 two , run awasi too , leav the booti behind them . ] 
 
 princ . your money ! 
 poin . villain ! 
 
 princ . got with much eas . now merrili to hors . 
 the thiev are scatter , and possess 'd with fear 
 so strongli that they dare not meet each other . 
 each take hi fellow for an offic . 
 away , good ned . falstaff sweat to death 
 and lard the lean earth as he walk along . 
 were't not for laugh , i should piti him . 
 poin . how the rogu roar 'd ! exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 warkworth castl . 
 
 enter hotspur solu , read a letter . 
 
 hot . 'but , for mine own part , my lord , i could be well content to 
 be there , in respect of the love i bear your hous . ' he could be 
 contented- whi is he not then ? in respect of the love he bear 
 our hous ! he show in thi he love hi own barn better than he 
 love our hous . let me see some more . 'the purpos you undertak 
 is dangerous'- whi , that 's certain ! 't is danger to take a 
 cold , to sleep , to drink ; but i tell you , my lord fool , out of 
 thi nettl , danger , we pluck thi flower , safeti . 'the purpos 
 you undertak is danger , the friend you have name uncertain , 
 the time itself unsort , and your whole plot too light for the 
 counterpois of so great an opposit . ' say you so , say you so ? 
 i say unto you again , you are a shallow , cowardli hind , and you 
 lie . what a lack-brain is thi ! by the lord , our plot is a good 
 plot as ever wa laid ; our friend true and constant : a good 
 plot , good friend , and full of expect ; an excel plot , 
 veri good friend . what a frosty-spirit rogu is thi ! whi , my 
 lord of york commend the plot and the gener cours of the 
 action . zound , an i were now by thi rascal , i could brain him 
 with hi ladi 's fan . is there not my father , my uncl , and 
 myself ; lord edmund mortim , my lord of york , and owen 
 glendow ? is there not , besid , the dougla ? have i not all 
 their letter to meet me in arm by the ninth of the next month , 
 and are they not some of them set forward alreadi ? what a pagan 
 rascal is thi ! an infidel ! ha ! you shall see now , in veri 
 sincer of fear and cold heart will he to the king and lay open 
 all our proceed . o , i could divid myself and go to buffet 
 for move such a dish of skim milk with so honour an action ! 
 hang him , let him tell the king ! we are prepar . i will set 
 forward to-night . 
 
 enter hi ladi . 
 
 how now , kate ? i must leav you within these two hour . 
 ladi . o my good lord , whi are you thu alon ? 
 for what offenc have i thi fortnight been 
 a banish 'd woman from my harri 's bed , 
 tell me , sweet lord , what is't that take from thee 
 thi stomach , pleasur , and thi golden sleep ? 
 whi dost thou bend thine eye upon the earth , 
 and start so often when thou sit'st alon ? 
 whi hast thou lost the fresh blood in thi cheek 
 and given my treasur and my right of thee 
 to thick-ey 'd muse and cur 'd melancholi ? 
 in thi faint slumber i by thee have watch 'd , 
 and heard thee murmur tale of iron war , 
 speak term of manag to thi bound steed , 
 cri 'courag ! to the field ! ' and thou hast talk 'd 
 of salli and retir , of trench , tent , 
 of palisado , frontier , parapet , 
 of basilisk , of cannon , culverin , 
 of prison ' ransom , and of soldier slain , 
 and all the current of a headi fight . 
 thi spirit within thee hath been so at war , 
 and thu hath so bestirr 'd thee in thi sleep , 
 that bead of sweat have stood upon thi brow 
 like bubbl ill a late-disturb stream , 
 and in thi face strang motion have appear 'd , 
 such as we see when men restrain their breath 
 on some great sudden hest . o , what portent are these ? 
 some heavi busi hath my lord in hand , 
 and i must know it , els he love me not . 
 hot . what , ho ! 
 
 [ enter a servant . ] 
 
 is gilliam with the packet gone ? 
 serv . he is , my lord , an hour ago . 
 hot . hath butler brought those hors from the sheriff ? 
 serv . one hors , my lord , he brought even now . 
 hot . what hors ? a roan , a crop-ear , is it not ? 
 serv . it is , my lord . 
 hot . that roan shall be my throne . 
 well , i will back him straight . o esper ! 
 bid butler lead him forth into the park . 
 [ exit servant . ] 
 ladi . but hear you , my lord . 
 hot . what say'st thou , my ladi ? 
 ladi . what is it carri you away ? 
 hot . whi , my hors , my love- my hors ! 
 ladi . out , you mad-head ape ! 
 a weasel hath not such a deal of spleen 
 as you are toss 'd with . in faith , 
 i 'll know your busi , harri ; that i will ! 
 i fear my brother mortim doth stir 
 about hi titl and hath sent for you 
 to line hi enterpris ; but if you go- 
 hot . so far afoot , i shall be weari , love . 
 ladi . come , come , you paraquito , answer me 
 directli unto thi question that i ask . 
 i 'll break thi littl finger , harri , 
 an if thou wilt not tell my all thing true . 
 hot . away . 
 away , you trifler ! love ? i love thee not ; 
 i care not for thee , kate . thi is no world 
 to play with mammet and to tilt with lip . 
 we must have bloodi nose and crack 'd crown , 
 and pass them current too . god me , my hors ! 
 what say'st thou , kate ? what wouldst thou have with me ? 
 ladi . do you not love me ? do you not inde ? 
 well , do not then ; for sinc you love me not , 
 i will not love myself . do you not love me ? 
 nay , tell me if you speak in jest or no . 
 hot . come , wilt thou see me ride ? 
 and when i am a-horseback , i will swear 
 i love thee infinit . but hark you . kate : 
 i must not have you henceforth question me 
 whither i go , nor reason whereabout . 
 whither i must , i must ; and to conclud , 
 thi even must i leav you , gentl kate . 
 i know you wise ; but yet no farther wise 
 than harri perci 's wife ; constant you are , 
 but yet a woman ; and for secreci , 
 no ladi closer , for i well believ 
 thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know , 
 and so far will i trust thee , gentl kate . 
 ladi . how ? so far ? 
 hot . not an inch further . but hark you , kate : 
 whither i go , thither shall you go too ; 
 to-day will i set forth , to-morrow you . 
 will thi content you , kate , ? 
 ladi . it must of forc . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 eastcheap . the boar 's head tavern . 
 
 enter princ and poin . 
 
 princ . ned , prithe come out of that fat-room and lend me thi hand 
 to laugh a littl . 
 poin . where hast been , hal ? 
 princ , . with three or four loggerhead amongst three or 
 fourscor hogshead . i have sound the veri bass-str of 
 humil . sirrah , i am sworn brother to a leash of drawer and 
 can call them all by their christen name , as tom , dick , and 
 franci . they take it alreadi upon their salvat that , though 
 i be but princ of wale , yet i am the king of courtesi ; and tell 
 me flatli i am no proud jack like falstaff , but a corinthian , a 
 lad of mettl , a good boy ( by the lord , so they call me ! ) , and 
 when i am king of england i shall command all the good lad 
 eastcheap . they call drink deep , die scarlet ; and when 
 you breath in your water , they cri 'hem ! ' and bid you play it 
 off . to conclud , i am so good a profici in one quarter of an 
 hour that i can drink with ani tinker in hi own languag dure 
 my life . i tell thee , ned , thou hast lost much honour that thou 
 wert not with me in thi action . but , sweet ned- to sweeten which 
 name of ned , i give thee thi pennyworth of sugar , clapp 'd even 
 now into my hand by an under-skink , one that never spake other 
 english in hi life than 'eight shill and sixpenc , ' and 'you 
 are welcom , ' with thi shrill addit , 'anon , anon , sir ! score 
 a pint of bastard in the half-moon , ' or so- but , ned , to drive 
 away the time till falstaff come , i prithe do thou stand in some 
 by-room while i question my puni drawer to what end be gave me 
 the sugar ; and do thou never leav call 'franci ! ' that hi 
 tale to me may be noth but 'anon ! ' step asid , and i 'll show 
 thee a preced . 
 poin . franci ! 
 princ . thou art perfect . 
 poin . franci ! [ exit poin . ] 
 
 enter [ franci , a ] drawer . 
 
 fran . anon , anon , sir.- look down into the pomgarnet , ralph . 
 princ . come hither , franci . 
 fran . my lord ? 
 princ . how long hast thou to serv , franci ? 
 fran . forsooth , five year , and as much as to- 
 poin . [ within ] franci ! 
 fran . anon , anon , sir . 
 princ . five year ! by ' r ladi , a long leas for the clink of 
 pewter . but , franci , darest thou be so valiant as to play the 
 coward with thi indentur and show it a fair pair of heel and 
 run from it ? 
 fran . o lord , sir , i 'll be sworn upon all the book in england i 
 could find in my heart- 
 poin . [ within ] franci ! 
 fran . anon , sir . 
 princ . how old art thou , franci ? 
 fran . let me see . about michaelma next i shall be- 
 poin . [ within ] franci ! 
 fran . anon , sir . pray stay a littl , my lord . 
 princ . nay , but hark you , franci . for the sugar thou gavest me- 
 't wa a pennyworth , wast not ? 
 fran . o lord ! i would it had been two ! 
 princ . i will give thee for it a thousand pound . ask me when thou 
 wilt , and , thou shalt have it . 
 poin . [ within ] franci ! 
 fran . anon , anon . 
 princ . anon , franci ? no , franci ; but to-morrow , franci ; or , 
 franci , a thursday ; or inde , franci , when thou wilt . but 
 francis- 
 fran . my lord ? 
 princ . wilt thou rob thi leathern-jerkin , crystal-button , 
 not-pat , agate-r , puke-stock , caddis-gart , 
 smooth-tongu , spanish-pouch- 
 fran . o lord , sir , who do you mean ? 
 princ . whi then , your brown bastard is your onli drink ; for look 
 you , franci , your white canva doublet will sulli . in barbari , 
 sir , it can not come to so much . 
 fran . what , sir ? 
 poin . [ within ] franci ! 
 princ . away , you rogu ! dost thou not hear them call ? 
 here they both call him . the drawer stand amaz , 
 not know which way to go . 
 
 enter vintner . 
 
 vint . what , stand'st thou still , and hear'st such a call ? look 
 to the guest within . [ exit franci . ] my lord , old sir john , with 
 half-a-dozen more , are at the door . shall i let them in ? 
 princ . let them alon awhil , and then open the door . 
 [ exit vintner . ] 
 poin ! 
 poin . [ within ] anon , anon , sir . 
 
 enter poin . 
 
 princ . sirrah , falstaff and the rest of the thiev are at the 
 door . shall we be merri ? 
 poin . as merri as cricket , my lad . but hark ye ; what cun 
 match have you made with thi jest of the drawer ? come , what 's 
 the issu ? 
 princ . i am now of all humour that have show themselv humour 
 sinc the old day of goodman adam to the pupil age of thi 
 present thi twelv o'clock at midnight . 
 
 [ enter franci . ] 
 
 what 's o'clock , franci ? 
 fran . anon , anon , sir . [ exit . ] 
 princ . that ever thi fellow should have fewer word than a 
 parrot , and yet the son of a woman ! hi industri is upstair and 
 downstair , hi eloqu the parcel of a reckon . i am not yet 
 of perci 's mind , the hotspur of the north ; he that kill me some 
 six or seven dozen of scot at a breakfast , wash hi hand , and 
 say to hi wife , 'fie upon thi quiet life ! i want work . ' ' o my 
 sweet harri , ' say she , 'how mani hast thou kill 'd to-day ? ' 
 'give my roan hors a drench , ' say he , and answer 'some 
 fourteen , ' an hour after , ' a trifl , a trifl . ' i prithe call in 
 falstaff . i 'll play perci , and that damn 'd brawn shall play dame 
 mortim hi wife . 'rivo ! ' say the drunkard . call in rib , call 
 in tallow . 
 
 enter falstaff , [ gadshil , bardolph , and peto ; 
 franci follow with wine ] . 
 
 poin . welcom , jack . where hast thou been ? 
 fal . a plagu of all coward , i say , and a vengeanc too ! marri and 
 amen ! give me a cup of sack , boy . ere i lead thi life long , i 'll 
 sew nether-stock , and mend them and foot them too . a plagu of 
 all coward ! give me a cup of sack , rogu . is there no virtu 
 extant ? 
 he drinketh . 
 princ . didst thou never see titan kiss a dish of butter ? 
 pitiful-heart butter , that melt at the sweet tale of the sun ! 
 if thou didst , then behold that compound . 
 fal . you rogu , here 's lime in thi sack too ! there is noth but 
 rogueri to be found in villan man . yet a coward is wors than 
 a cup of sack with lime in it- a villan coward ! go thi way , 
 old jack , die when thou wilt ; if manhood , good manhood , be not 
 forgot upon the face of the earth , then am i a shotten her . 
 there live not three good men unhang 'd in england ; and one of 
 them is fat , and grow old . god help the while ! a bad world , i 
 say . i would i were a weaver ; i could sing psalm or anyth . a 
 plagu of all coward i say still ! 
 princ . how now , woolsack ? what mutter you ? 
 fal . a king 's son ! if i do not beat thee out of thi kingdom with a 
 dagger of lath and drive all thi subject afor thee like a flock 
 of wild gees , i 'll never wear hair on my face more . you princ 
 of wale ? 
 princ . whi , you whoreson round man , what 's the matter ? 
 fal . are not you a coward ? answer me to that- and poin there ? 
 poin . zound , ye fat paunch , an ye call me coward , by the 
 lord , i 'll stab thee . 
 fal . i call thee coward ? i 'll see thee damn 'd ere i call thee 
 coward , but i would give a thousand pound i could run as fast as 
 thou canst . you are straight enough in the shoulder ; you care 
 not who see your back . call you that back of your friend ? a 
 plagu upon such back ! give me them that will face me . give me 
 a cup of sack . i am a rogu if i drunk to-day . 
 princ . o villain ! thi lip are scarc wip 'd sinc thou drunk'st 
 last . 
 fal . all is one for that . ( he drinketh . ) a plagu of all coward 
 still say i . 
 princ . what 's the matter ? 
 fal . what 's the matter ? there be four of us here have ta'en a 
 thousand pound thi day morn . 
 princ . where is it , jack ? where is it ? 
 fal . where is it , taken from us it is . a hundr upon poor four of 
 us ! 
 princ . what , a hundr , man ? 
 fal . i am a rogu if i were not at half-sword with a dozen of them 
 two hour togeth . i have scap 'd by miracl . i am eight time 
 thrust through the doublet , four through the hose ; my buckler cut 
 through and through ; my sword hack 'd like a handsaw- ecc signum ! 
 i never dealt better sinc i wa a man . all would not do . a 
 plagu of all coward ! let them speak , if they speak more or less 
 than truth , they are villain and the son of dark . 
 princ . speak , sir . how wa it ? 
 gad . we four set upon some dozen- 
 fal . sixteen at least , my lord . 
 gad . and bound them . 
 peto . no , no , they were not bound . 
 fal . you rogu , they were bound , everi man of them , or i am a jew 
 else- an ebrew jew . 
 gad . as we were share , some six or seven fresh men sea upon us- 
 fal . and unbound the rest , and then come in the other . 
 princ . what , fought you with them all ? 
 fal . all ? i know not what you call all , but if i fought not with 
 fifti of them , i am a bunch of radish ! if there were not two or 
 three and fifti upon poor old jack , then am i no two-legg 'd 
 creatur . 
 princ . pray god you have not murd'r some of them . 
 fal . nay , that 's past pray for . i have pepper 'd two of them . two 
 i am sure i have paid , two rogu in buckram suit . i tell thee 
 what , hal- if i tell thee a lie , spit in my face , call me hors . 
 thou knowest my old ward . here i lay , and thu i bore my point . 
 four rogu in buckram let drive at me . 
 princ . what , four ? thou saidst but two even now . 
 fal . four , hal . i told thee four . 
 poin . ay , ay , he said four . 
 fal . these four came all afront and mainli thrust at me . i made me 
 no more ado but took all their seven point in my target , thu . 
 princ . seven ? whi , there were but four even now . 
 fal . in buckram ? 
 poin . ay , four , in buckram suit . 
 fal . seven , by these hilt , or i am a villain els . 
 princ . [ asid to poin ] prithe let him alon . we shall have more 
 anon . 
 fal . dost thou hear me , hal ? 
 princ . ay , and mark thee too , jack . 
 fal . do so , for it is worth the list'n to . these nine in buckram 
 that i told thee of- 
 princ . so , two more alreadi . 
 fal . their point be broken- 
 poin . down fell their hose . 
 fal . began to give me ground ; but i follow me close , came in , 
 foot and hand , and with a thought seven of the eleven i paid . 
 princ . o monstrou ! eleven buckram men grown out of two ! 
 fal . but , as the devil would have it , three misbegotten knave in 
 kendal green came at my back and let drive at me ; for it wa so 
 dark , hal , that thou couldst not see thi hand . 
 princ . these lie are like their father that beget them- gross as 
 a mountain , open , palpabl . whi , thou clay-brain 'd gut , thou 
 knotty-p fool , thou whoreson obscen greasi tallow-catch- 
 fal . what , art thou mad ? art thou mad ? is not the truth the truth ? 
 princ . whi , how couldst thou know these men in kendal green when 
 it wa so dark thou couldst not see thi hand ? come , tell us your 
 reason . what sayest thou to thi ? 
 poin . come , your reason , jack , your reason . 
 fal . what , upon compuls ? zound , an i were at the strappado or 
 all the rack in the world , i would not tell you on compuls . 
 give you a reason on compuls ? if reason were as plenti as 
 blackberri , i would give no man a reason upon compuls , i . 
 princ . i 'll be no longer guilti , of thi sin ; thi sanguin 
 coward , thi bed-press , thi horseback-break , thi huge hill 
 of flesh- 
 fal . 'sblood , you starvel , you elf-skin , you dri 
 neat's-tongu , you bull 's sizzl , you stockfish- o for breath to 
 utter what is like thee ! - you tailor 's yard , you sheath , you 
 bowcas , you vile stand tuck ! 
 princ . well , breath awhil , and then to it again ; and when thou 
 hast tire thyself in base comparison , hear me speak but thi . 
 poin . mark , jack . 
 princ . we two saw you four set on four , and bound them and were 
 master of their wealth . mark now how a plain tale shall put you 
 down . then did we two set on you four and , with a word , outfac 'd 
 you from your prize , and have it ; yea , and can show it you here 
 in the hous . and , falstaff , you carri your gut away as 
 nimbl , with as quick dexter , and roar 'd for merci , and still 
 run and roar 'd , as ever i heard bullcalf . what a slave art thou 
 to hack thi sword as thou hast done , and then say it wa in 
 fight ! what trick , what devic , what start hole canst thou now 
 find out to hide thee from thi open and appar shame ? 
 poin . come , let 's hear , jack . what trick hast thou now ? 
 fal . by the lord , i knew ye as well as he that made ye . whi , hear 
 you , my master . wa it for me to kill the heir appar ? should 
 i turn upon the true princ ? whi , thou knowest i am as valiant as 
 hercul ; but bewar instinct . the lion will not touch the true 
 princ . instinct is a great matter . i wa now a coward on 
 instinct . i shall think the better of myself , and thee , dure my 
 life- i for a valiant lion , and thou for a true princ . but , by 
 the lord , lad , i am glad you have the money . hostess , clap to 
 the door . watch to-night , pray to-morrow . gallant , lad , boy , 
 heart of gold , all the titl of good fellowship come to you ! 
 what , shall we be merri ? shall we have a play extempor ? 
 princ . content- and the argument shall be thi run away . 
 fal . ah , no more of that , hal , an thou lovest me ! 
 
 enter hostess . 
 
 host . o jesu , my lord the princ ! 
 princ . how now , my ladi the hostess ? what say'st thou to me ? 
 host . marri , my lord , there is a nobleman of the court at door 
 would speak with you . he say he come from your father . 
 princ . give him as much as will make him a royal man , and send him 
 back again to my mother . 
 fal . what manner of man is he ? 
 host . an old man . 
 fal . what doth graviti out of hi bed at midnight ? shall i give him 
 hi answer ? 
 princ . prithe do , jack . 
 fal . faith , and i 'll send him pack . 
 exit . 
 princ . now , sir . by ' r ladi , you fought fair ; so did you , peto ; so 
 did you , bardolph . you are lion too , you ran away upon instinct , 
 you will not touch the true princ ; no- fie ! 
 bard . faith , i ran when i saw other run . 
 princ . tell me now in earnest , how came falstaff 's sword so 
 hack 'd ? 
 peto . whi , he hack 'd it with hi dagger , and said he would swear 
 truth out of england but he would make you believ it wa done in 
 fight , and persuad us to do the like . 
 bard . yea , and to tickl our nose with speargrass to make them 
 bleed , and then to beslubb our garment with it and swear it 
 wa the blood of true men . i did that i did not thi seven year 
 before- i blush 'd to hear hi monstrou devic . 
 princ . o villain ! thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen year ago 
 and wert taken with the manner , and ever sinc thou hast blush 'd 
 extempor . thou hadst fire and sword on thi side , and yet thou 
 ran'st away . what instinct hadst thou for it ? 
 bard . my lord , do you see these meteor ? do you behold these 
 exhal ? 
 princ . i do . 
 bard . what think you they portend ? 
 princ . hot liver and cold purs . 
 bard . choler , my lord , if rightli taken . 
 princ . no , if rightli taken , halter . 
 
 enter falstaff . 
 
 here come lean jack ; here come bare-bon . how now , my sweet 
 creatur of bombast ? how long is't ago , jack , sinc thou sawest 
 thine own knee ? 
 fal . my own knee ? when i wa about thi year , hal , i wa not an 
 eagl 's talent in the waist ; i could have crept into ani 
 alderman 's thumb-r . a plagu of sigh and grief ! it blow a 
 man up like a bladder . there 's villan news abroad . here wa 
 sir john braci from your father . you must to the court in the 
 morn . that same mad fellow of the north , perci , and he of 
 wale that gave amamon the bastinado , and made lucif cuckold , 
 and swore the devil hi true liegeman upon the cross of a welsh 
 hook- what a plagu call you him ? 
 poin . o , glendow . 
 fal . owen , owen- the same ; and hi son-in-law mortim , and old 
 northumberland , and that sprightli scot of scot , dougla , that 
 run a-horseback up a hill perpendicular- 
 princ . he that ride at high speed and with hi pistol kill a 
 sparrow fli . 
 fal . you have hit it . 
 princ . so did he never the sparrow . 
 fal . well , that rascal hath good metal in him ; he will not run . 
 princ . whi , what a rascal art thou then , to prais him so for 
 run ! 
 fal . a-horseback , ye cuckoo ! but afoot he will not budg a foot . 
 princ . ye , jack , upon instinct . 
 fal . i grant ye , upon instinct . well , he is there too , and one 
 mordak , and a thousand bluecap more . worcest is stol'n away 
 to-night ; thi father 's beard is turn 'd white with the news ; you 
 may buy land now as cheap as stink mack'rel . 
 princ . whi then , it is like , if there come a hot june , and thi 
 civil buffet hold , we shall buy maidenhead as they buy 
 hobnail , by the hundr . 
 fal . by the mass , lad , thou sayest true ; it is like we shall have 
 good trade that way . but tell me , hal , art not thou horribl 
 afeard ? thou be heir appar , could the world pick thee out 
 three such enemi again as that fiend dougla , that spirit 
 perci , and that devil glendow ? art thou not horribl afraid ? 
 doth not thi blood thrill at it ? 
 princ . not a whit , i ' faith . i lack some of thi instinct . 
 fal . well , thou wilt be horribl chid to-morrow when thou comest to 
 thi father . if thou love file , practis an answer . 
 princ . do thou stand for my father and examin me upon the 
 particular of my life . 
 fal . shall i ? content . thi chair shall be my state , thi dagger my 
 sceptr , and thi cushion my , crown . 
 princ . thi state is taken for a join'd-stool , thi golden sceptr 
 for a leaden dagger , and thi preciou rich crown for a piti 
 bald crown . 
 fal . well , an the fire of grace be not quit out of thee , now shalt 
 thou be move . give me a cup of sack to make my eye look red , 
 that it may be thought i have wept ; for i must speak in passion , 
 and i will do it in king cambys ' vein . 
 princ . well , here is my leg . 
 fal . and here is my speech . stand asid , nobil . 
 host . o jesu , thi is excel sport , i ' faith ! 
 fal . weep not , sweet queen , for trickl tear are vain . 
 host . o , the father , how he hold hi counten ! 
 fal . for god 's sake , lord , convey my trist queen ! 
 for tear do stop the floodgat of her eye . 
 host . o jesu , he doth it as like one of these harlotri player as 
 ever i see ! 
 fal . peac , good pintpot . peac , good tickle-brain.- harri , i do 
 not onli marvel where thou spendest thi time , but also how thou 
 art accompani . for though the camomil , the more it is trodden 
 on , the faster it grow , yet youth , the more it is wast , the 
 sooner it wear . that thou art my son i have partli thi mother 's 
 word , partli my own opinion , but chiefli a villan trick of 
 thine eye and a foolish hang of thi nether lip that doth 
 warrant me . if then thou be son to me , here lie the point : whi , 
 be son to me , art thou so point at ? shall the bless sun of 
 heaven prove a micher and eat blackberri ? a question not to be 
 ask 'd . shall the son of england prove a thief and take purs ? a 
 question to be ask 'd . there is a thing , harri , which thou hast 
 often heard of , and it is known to mani in our land by the name 
 of pitch . thi pitch , as ancient writer do report , doth defil ; 
 so doth the compani thou keepest . for , harri , now i do not speak 
 to thee in drink , but in tear ; not in pleasur , but in passion ; 
 not in word onli , but in woe also : and yet there is a virtuou 
 man whom i have often note in thi compani , but i know not hi 
 name . 
 princ . what manner of man , an it like your majesti ? 
 fal . a goodli portli man , i ' faith , and a corpul ; of a cheer 
 look , a pleas eye , and a most nobl carriag ; and , as i think , 
 hi age some fifti , or , by ' r ladi , inclin to threescor ; and 
 now i rememb me , hi name is falstaff . if that man should be 
 lewdli , given , he deceiveth me ; for , harri , i see virtu in hi 
 look . if then the tree may be known by the fruit , as the fruit 
 by the tree , then , peremptorili i speak it , there is virtu in 
 that falstaff . him keep with , the rest banish . and tell me now , 
 thou naughti varlet , tell me where hast thou been thi month ? 
 princ . dost thou speak like a king ? do thou stand for me , and i 'll 
 play my father . 
 fal . depos me ? if thou dost it half so grave , so majest , 
 both in word and matter , hang me up by the heel for a 
 rabbit-suck or a poulter 's hare . 
 princ . well , here i am set . 
 fal . and here i stand . judg , my master . 
 princ . now , harri , whenc come you ? 
 fal . my nobl lord , from eastcheap . 
 princ . the complaint i hear of thee are grievou . 
 fal . 'sblood , my lord , they are fals ! nay , i 'll tickl ye for a 
 young princ , i ' faith . 
 princ . swearest thou , ungraci boy ? henceforth ne'er look on me . 
 thou art violent carri away from grace . there is a devil 
 haunt thee in the like of an old fat man ; a tun of man is 
 thi companion . whi dost thou convers with that trunk of humour , 
 that bolt hutch of beastli , that swoll'n parcel of 
 dropsi , that huge bombard of sack , that stuff 'd cloakbag of 
 gut , that roast manningtre ox with the pud in hi belli , 
 that reverend vice , that grey iniqu , that father ruffian , that 
 vaniti in year ? wherein is he good , but to tast sack and drink 
 it ? wherein neat and cleanli , but to carv a capon and eat it ? 
 wherein cun , but in craft ? wherein crafti , but in villani ? 
 wherein villan , but in all thing ? wherein worthi , but in 
 noth ? 
 fal . i would your grace would take me with you . whom mean your 
 grace ? 
 princ . that villan abomin mislead of youth , falstaff , 
 that old white-beard satan . 
 fal . my lord , the man i know . 
 princ . i know thou dost . 
 fal . but to say i know more harm in him than in myself were to say 
 more than i know . that he is old ( the more the piti ) hi white 
 hair do wit it ; but that he is ( save your rever ) a 
 whoremast , that i utterli deni . if sack and sugar be a fault , 
 god help the wick ! if to be old and merri be a sin , then mani 
 an old host that i know is damn 'd . if to be fat be to be hate , 
 then pharaoh 's lean kine are to be love . no , my good lord . 
 banish peto , banish bardolph , banish poin ; but for sweet jack 
 falstaff , kind jack falstaff , true jack falstaff , valiant jack 
 falstaff , and therefor more valiant be , as he is , old jack 
 falstaff , banish not him thi harri 's compani , banish not him thi 
 harri 's compani . banish plump jack , and banish all the world ! 
 princ . i do , i will . [ a knock heard . ] 
 [ exeunt hostess , franci , and bardolph . ] 
 
 enter bardolph , run . 
 
 bard . o , my lord , my lord ! the sheriff with a most monstrou watch 
 is at the door . 
 fal . out , ye rogu ! play out the play . i have much to say in the 
 behalf of that falstaff . 
 
 enter the hostess . 
 
 host . o jesu , my lord , my lord ! 
 princ . heigh , heigh , the devil ride upon a fiddlestick ! 
 what 's the matter ? 
 host . the sheriff and all the watch are at the door . they are come 
 to search the hous . shall i let them in ? 
 fal . dost thou hear , hal ? never call a true piec of gold a 
 counterfeit . thou art essenti mad without seem so . 
 princ . and thou a natur coward without instinct . 
 fal . i deni your major . if you will deni the sheriff , so ; if not , 
 let him enter . if i becom not a cart as well as anoth man , a 
 plagu on my bring up ! i hope i shall as soon be strangl 
 with a halter as anoth . 
 princ . go hide thee behind the arra . the rest walk , up abov . 
 now , my master , for a true face and good conscienc . 
 fal . both which i have had ; but their date is out , and therefor 
 i 'll hide me . exit . 
 princ . call in the sheriff . 
 [ exeunt manent the princ and peto . ] 
 
 enter sheriff and the carrier . 
 
 now , master sheriff , what is your will with me ? 
 sher . first , pardon me , my lord . a hue and cri 
 hath follow certain men unto thi hous . 
 princ . what men ? 
 sher . one of them is well known , my graciou lord- 
 a gross fat man . 
 carrier . as fat as butter . 
 princ . the man , i do assur you , is not here , 
 for i myself at thi time have employ 'd him . 
 and , sheriff , i will engag my word to thee 
 that i will by to-morrow dinner time 
 send him to answer thee , or ani man , 
 for anyth he shall be charg 'd withal ; 
 and so let me entreat you leav the hous . 
 sher . i will , my lord . there are two gentlemen 
 have in thi robberi lost three hundr mark . 
 princ . it may be so . if he have robb 'd these men , 
 he shall be answer ; and so farewel . 
 sher . good night , my nobl lord . 
 princ . i think it is good morrow , is it not ? 
 sher . inde , my lord , i think it be two o'clock . 
 exit [ with carrier ] . 
 princ . thi oili rascal is known as well as paul 's . go call him 
 forth . 
 peto . falstaff ! fast asleep behind the arra , and snort like a 
 hors . 
 princ . hark how hard he fetch breath . search hi pocket . 
 he searcheth hi pocket and findeth certain paper . 
 what hast thou found ? 
 peto . noth but paper , my lord . 
 princ . let 's see whit they be . read them . 
 
 peto . [ read ] 'item . a capon . . . . . . . . . . . . . ii s. ii d. 
 item , sauc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iiii d. 
 item , sack two gallon . . . . . . . . v s. viii d. 
 item , anchovi and sack after supper . ii s. vi d. 
 item , bread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ob . ' 
 
 princ . o monstrou ! but one halfpennyworth of bread to thi 
 intoler deal of sack ! what there is els , keep close ; we 'll 
 read it at more advantag . there let him sleep till day . i 'll to 
 the court in the morn . we must all to the war . and thi place 
 shall be honour . i 'll procur thi fat rogu a charg of 
 foot ; and i know , hi death will be a march of twelv score . the 
 money shall be paid back again with advantag . be with me betim 
 in the morn , and so good morrow , peto . 
 peto . good morrow , good my lord . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 bangor . the archdeacon 's hous . 
 
 enter hotspur , worcest , lord mortim , owen glendow . 
 
 mort . these promis are fair , the parti sure , 
 and our induct full of prosper hope . 
 hot . lord mortim , and cousin glendow , 
 will you sit down ? 
 and uncl worcest . a plagu upon it ! 
 i have forgot the map . 
 glend . no , here it is . 
 sit , cousin perci ; sit , good cousin hotspur , 
 for by that name as oft as lancast 
 doth speak of you , hi cheek look pale , and with 
 a rise sigh he wisheth you in heaven . 
 hot . and you in hell , as oft as he hear 
 owen glendow spoke of . 
 glend . i can not blame him . at my nativ 
 the front of heaven wa full of fieri shape 
 of burn cresset , and at my birth 
 the frame and huge foundat of the earth 
 shak 'd like a coward . 
 hot . whi , so it would have done at the same season , if your 
 mother 's cat had but kitten 'd , though yourself had never been 
 born . 
 glend . i say the earth did shake when i wa born . 
 hot . and i say the earth wa not of my mind , 
 if you suppos as fear you it shook . 
 glend . the heaven were all on fire , the earth did trembl . 
 hot . o , then the earth shook to see the heaven on fire , 
 and not in fear of your nativ . 
 diseas natur oftentim break forth 
 in strang erupt ; oft the teem earth 
 is with a kind of colic pinch 'd and vex 'd 
 by the imprison of unruli wind 
 within her womb , which , for enlarg strive , 
 shake the old beldam earth and toppl down 
 steepl and mossgrown tower . at your birth 
 our grandam earth , have thi distemp'ratur , 
 in passion shook . 
 glend . cousin , of mani men 
 i do not bear these cross . give me leav 
 to tell you onc again that at my birth 
 the front of heaven wa full of fieri shape , 
 the goat ran from the mountain , and the herd 
 were strang clamor to the fright field . 
 these sign have mark 'd me extraordinari , 
 and all the cours of my life do show 
 i am not in the roll of common men . 
 where is he live , clipp 'd in with the sea 
 that chide the bank of england , scotland , wale , 
 which call me pupil or hath read to me ? 
 and bring him out that is but woman 's son 
 can trace me in the tediou way of art 
 and hold me pace in deep experi . 
 hot . i think there 's no man speak better welsh . i 'll to dinner . 
 mort . peac , cousin perci ; you will make him mad . 
 glend . i can call spirit from the vasti deep . 
 hot . whi , so can i , or so can ani man ; 
 but will they come when you do call for them ? 
 glend . whi , i can teach you , cousin , to command the devil . 
 hot . and i can teach thee , coz , to shame the devil- 
 by tell truth . tell truth and shame the devil . 
 if thou have power to rais him , bring him hither , 
 and i 'll be sworn i have power to shame him henc . 
 o , while you live , tell truth and shame the devil ! 
 mort . come , come , no more of thi unprofit chat . 
 glend . three time hath henri bolingbrok made head 
 against my power ; thrice from the bank of wye 
 and sandy-bottom 'd severn have i sent him 
 bootless home and weather-beaten back . 
 hot . home without boot , and in foul weather too ? 
 how scape he agu , in the devil 's name 
 glend . come , here 's the map . shall we divid our right 
 accord to our threefold order ta'en ? 
 mort . the archdeacon hath divid it 
 into three limit veri equal . 
 england , from trent and severn hitherto , 
 by south and east is to my part assign 'd ; 
 all westward , wale beyond the severn shore , 
 and all the fertil land within that bound , 
 to owen glendow ; and , dear coz , to you 
 the remnant northward lie off from trent . 
 and our indentur tripartit are drawn ; 
 which be seal interchang 
 ( a busi that thi night may execut ) , 
 to-morrow , cousin perci , you and i 
 and my good lord of worcest will set forth 
 to meet your father and the scottish bower , 
 as is appoint us , at shrewsburi . 
 my father glendow is not readi yet , 
 nor shall we need hi help these fourteen day . 
 [ to glend . ] within that space you may have drawn togeth 
 your tenant , friend , and neighbour gentlemen . 
 glend . a shorter time shall send me to you , lord ; 
 and in my conduct shall your ladi come , 
 from whom you now must steal and take no leav , 
 for there will be a world of water shed 
 upon the part of your wive and you . 
 hot . methink my moieti , north from burton here , 
 in quantiti equal not one of your . 
 see how thi river come me crank in 
 and cut me from the best of all my land 
 a huge half-moon , a monstrou cantl out . 
 i 'll have the current ill thi place damm 'd up , 
 and here the smug and sliver trent shall run 
 in a new channel fair and evenli . 
 it shall not wind with such a deep indent 
 to rob me of so rich a bottom here . 
 glend . not wind ? it shall , it must ! you see it doth . 
 mort . yea , but 
 mark how he bear hi cours , and run me up 
 with like advantag on the other side , 
 geld the oppos contin as much 
 as on the other side it take from you . 
 wor . yea , but a littl charg will trench him here 
 and on thi north side win thi cape of land ; 
 and then he run straight and even . 
 hot . i 'll have it so . a littl charg will do it . 
 glend . i will not have it alt'r . 
 hot . will not you ? 
 glend . no , nor you shall not . 
 hot . who shall say me nay ? 
 glend . no , that will i . 
 hot . let me not understand you then ; speak it in welsh . 
 glend . i can speak english , lord , as well as you ; 
 for i wa train 'd up in the english court , 
 where , be but young , i frame to the harp 
 mani an english ditti love well , 
 and gave the tongu a help ornament- 
 a virtu that wa never seen in you . 
 hot . marri , 
 and i am glad of it with all my heart ! 
 i had rather be a kitten and cri mew 
 than one of these same metr ballet-mong . 
 i had rather hear a brazen canstick turn 'd 
 or a dri wheel grate on the axletre , 
 and that would set my teeth noth on edg , 
 noth so much as minc poetri . 
 't is like the forc 'd gait of a shuffl nag , 
 glend . come , you shall have trent turn 'd . 
 hot . i do not care . i 'll give thrice so much land 
 to ani well-deserv friend ; 
 but in the way of bargain , mark ye me , 
 i 'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair 
 are the indentur drawn ? shall we be gone ? 
 glend . the moon shine fair ; you may away by night . 
 i 'll hast the writer , and withal 
 break with your wive of your departur henc . 
 i am afraid my daughter will run mad , 
 so much she doteth on her mortim . exit . 
 mort . fie , cousin perci ! how you cross my father ! 
 hot . i can not choos . sometim he anger me 
 with tell me of the moldwarp and the ant , 
 of the dreamer merlin and hi propheci , 
 and of a dragon and a finless fish , 
 a clip-w 'd griffin and a moulten raven , 
 a couch lion and a ramp cat , 
 and such a deal of skimble-skambl stuff 
 as put me from my faith . i tell you what- 
 he held me last night at least nine hour 
 in reckon up the sever devil ' name 
 that were hi lackey . i cri 'hum , ' and 'well , go to ! ' 
 but mark 'd him not a word . o , he is as tediou 
 as a tire hors , a rail wife ; 
 wors than a smoki hous . i had rather live 
 with chees and garlic in a windmil far 
 than feed on cate and have him talk to me 
 in ani summer hous in christendom ) . 
 mort . in faith , he is a worthi gentleman , 
 exceedingli well read , and profit 
 in strang conceal , valiant as a lion , 
 and wondrou affabl , and as bounti 
 as mine of india . shall i tell you , cousin ? 
 he hold your temper in a high respect 
 and curb himself even of hi natur scope 
 when you come 'cross hi humour . faith , he doe . 
 i warrant you that man is not aliv 
 might so have tempt him as you have done 
 without the tast of danger and reproof . 
 but do not use it oft , let me entreat you . 
 wor . in faith , my lord , you are too wilful-blam , 
 and sinc your come hither have done enough 
 to put him quit besid hi patienc . 
 you must need learn , lord , to amend thi fault . 
 though sometim it show great , courag , blood- 
 and that 's the dearest grace it render you- 
 yet oftentim it doth present harsh rage , 
 defect of manner , want of govern , 
 pride , haughti , opinion , and disdain ; 
 the least of which haunt a nobleman 
 loseth men 's heart , and leav behind a stain 
 upon the beauti of all part besid , 
 beguil them of commend . 
 hot . well , i am school 'd . good manner be your speed ! 
 here come our wive , and let us take our leav . 
 
 enter glendow with the ladi . 
 
 mort . thi is the deadli spite that anger me- 
 my wife can speak no english , i no welsh . 
 glend . my daughter weep ; she will not part with you ; 
 she 'll be a soldier too , she 'll to the war . 
 mort . good father , tell her that she and my aunt perci 
 shall follow in your conduct speedili . 
 glendow speak to her in welsh , and she answer 
 him in the same . 
 glend . she is desper here . a peevish self-wil 'd harlotri , 
 one that no persuas can do good upon . 
 the ladi speak in welsh . 
 mort . i understand thi look . that pretti welsh 
 which thou pourest down from these swell heaven 
 i am too perfect in ; and , but for shame , 
 in such a barley should i answer thee . 
 the ladi again in welsh . 
 i understand thi kiss , and thou mine , 
 and that 's a feel disput . 
 but i will never be a truant , love , 
 till i have learnt thi languag : for thi tongu 
 make welsh as sweet as ditti highli penn 'd , 
 sung by a fair queen in a summer 's bow ' r , 
 with ravish divis , to her lute . 
 glend . nay , if you melt , then will she run mad . 
 the ladi speak again in welsh . 
 mort . o , i am ignor itself in thi ! 
 glend . she bid you on the wanton rush lay you down 
 and rest your gentl head upon her lap , 
 and she will sing the song that pleaseth you 
 and on your eyelid crown the god of sleep , 
 charm your blood with pleas heavi , 
 make such differ 'twixt wake and sleep 
 as is the differ betwixt day and night 
 the hour befor the heavenly-har 'd team 
 begin hi golden progress in the east . 
 mort . with all my heart i 'll sit and hear her sing . 
 by that time will our book , i think , be drawn . 
 glend . do so , 
 and those musician that shall play to you 
 hang in the air a thousand leagu from henc , 
 and straight they shall be here . sit , and attend . 
 hot . come , kate , thou art perfect in lie down . come , quick , 
 quick , that i may lay my head in thi lap . 
 ladi p. go , ye giddi goos . 
 the music play . 
 hot . now i perceiv the devil understand welsh ; 
 and 't is no marvel , be is so humor . 
 by ' r ladi , he is a good musician . 
 ladi p. then should you be noth but music ; for you are 
 altogeth govern 'd by humour . lie still , ye thief , and hear the 
 ladi sing in welsh . 
 hot . i had rather hear ladi , my brach , howl in irish . 
 ladi p. wouldst thou have thi head broken ? 
 hot . no . 
 ladi p. then be still . 
 hot . neither ! 't is a woman 's fault . 
 ladi p. now god help thee ! 
 hot . to the welsh ladi 's bed . 
 ladi p. what 's that ? 
 hot . peac ! she sing . 
 here the ladi sing a welsh song . 
 come , kate , i 'll have your song too . 
 ladi p. not mine , in good sooth . 
 hot . not your , in good sooth ? heart ! you swear like a 
 comfit-mak 's wife . 'not you , in good sooth ! ' and 'a true as i 
 live ! ' and 'a god shall mend me ! ' and 'a sure as day ! ' 
 and givest such sarcenet sureti for thi oath 
 as if thou ne'er walk'st further than finsburi . 
 swear me , kate , like a ladi as thou art , 
 a good mouth-fil oath ; and leav 'in sooth ' 
 and such protest of pepper gingerbread 
 to velvet guard and sunday citizen . come , sing . 
 ladi p. i will not sing . 
 hot . 't is the next way to turn tailor or be redbreast-teach . an 
 the indentur be drawn , i 'll away within these two hour ; and so 
 come in when ye will . exit . 
 glend . come , come , lord mortim . you are as slow 
 as hot lord perci is on fire to go . 
 by thi our book is drawn ; we 'll but seal , 
 and then to hors immedi . 
 mort . with all my heart . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 london . the palac . 
 
 enter the king , princ of wale , and other . 
 
 king . lord , give us leav . the princ of wale and i 
 must have some privat confer ; but be near at hand , 
 for we shall present have need of you . 
 exeunt lord . 
 i know not whether god will have it so , 
 for some displeas servic i have done , 
 that , in hi secret doom , out of my blood 
 he 'll breed reveng and a scourg for me ; 
 but thou dost in thi passag of life 
 make me believ that thou art onli mark 'd 
 for the hot vengeanc and the rod of heaven 
 to punish my mistread . tell me els , 
 could such inordin and low desir , 
 such poor , such bare , such lewd , such mean attempt , 
 such barren pleasur , rude societi , 
 as thou art match 'd withal and graft to , 
 accompani the great of thi blood 
 and hold their level with thi princ heart ? 
 princ . so pleas your majesti , i would i could 
 quit all offenc with as clear excus 
 as well as i am doubtless i can purg 
 myself of mani i am charg withal . 
 yet such extenu let me beg 
 as , in reproof of mani tale devi 'd , 
 which oft the ear of great need must bear 
 by , smile pickthank and base newsmong , 
 i may , for some thing true wherein my youth 
 hath faulti wand'r and irregular , 
 and pardon on lili true submiss . 
 king . god pardon thee ! yet let me wonder , harri , 
 at thi affect , which do hold a wing , 
 quit from the flight of all thi ancestor . 
 thi place in council thou hast rude lost , 
 which by thi younger brother is suppli , 
 and art almost an alien to the heart 
 of all the court and princ of my blood . 
 the hope and expect of thi time 
 is ruin 'd , and the soul of everi man 
 prophet do forethink thi fall . 
 had i so lavish of my presenc been , 
 so common-hackney 'd in the eye of men , 
 so stale and cheap to vulgar compani , 
 opinion , that did help me to the crown , 
 had still kept loyal to possess 
 and left me in reputeless banish , 
 a fellow of no mark nor likelihood . 
 by be seldom seen , i could not stir 
 but , like a comet , i wa wond'r at ; 
 that men would tell their children , 'thi is he ! ' 
 other would say , 'where ? which is bolingbrok ? ' 
 and then i stole all courtesi from heaven , 
 and dress 'd myself in such humil 
 that i did pluck allegi from men 's heart , 
 loud shout and salut from their mouth 
 even in the presenc of the crown king . 
 thu did i keep my person fresh and new , 
 my presenc , like a robe pontif , 
 ne'er seen but wond'r at ; and so my state , 
 seldom but sumptuou , show 'd like a feast 
 and won by rare such solemn . 
 the skip king , he ambl up and down 
 with shallow jester and rash bavin wit , 
 soon kindl and soon burnt ; card hi state ; 
 mingl hi royalti with cap'r fool ; 
 had hi great name profan with their scorn 
 and gave hi counten , against hi name , 
 to laugh at gibe boy and stand the push 
 of everi beardless vain compar ; 
 grew a companion to the common street , 
 enfeoff 'd himself to popular ; 
 that , be dalli swallow by men 's eye , 
 they surfeit with honey and began 
 to loath the tast of sweet , whereof a littl 
 more than a littl is by much too much . 
 so , when he had occas to be seen , 
 he wa but as the cuckoo is in june , 
 heard , not regarded- seen , but with such eye 
 as , sick and blunt with commun , 
 afford no extraordinari gaze , 
 such as is bent on unlik majesti 
 when it shine seldom in admir eye ; 
 but rather drow 'd and hung their eyelid down , 
 slept in hi face , and rend'r such aspect 
 as cloudi men use to their adversari , 
 be with hi presenc glut , gorg 'd , and full . 
 and in that veri line , harri , standest thou ; 
 for thou hast lost thi princ privileg 
 with vile particip . not an eye 
 but is aweari of thi common sight , 
 save mine , which hath desir 'd to see thee more ; 
 which now doth that i would not have it do- 
 make blind itself with foolish tender . 
 princ . i shall hereaft , my thrice-graci lord , 
 be more myself . 
 king . for all the world , 
 as thou art to thi hour , wa richard then 
 when i from franc set foot at ravenspurgh ; 
 and even as i wa then is perci now . 
 now , by my sceptr , and my soul to boot , 
 he hath more worthi interest to the state 
 than thou , the shadow of success ; 
 for of no right , nor colour like to right , 
 he doth fill field with har in the realm , 
 turn head against the lion 's arm jaw , 
 and , be no more in debt to year than thou , 
 lead ancient lord and reverend bishop on 
 to bloodi battl and to bruis arm . 
 what never-di honour hath he got 
 against renowm dougla ! whose high deed , 
 whose hot incurs and great name in arm 
 hold from all soldier chief major 
 and militari titl capit 
 through all the kingdom that acknowledg christ . 
 thrice hath thi hotspur , mar in swathl cloth , 
 thi infant warrior , in hi enterpris 
 discomfit great dougla ; ta'en him onc , 
 enlarg him , and made a friend of him , 
 to fill the mouth of deep defianc up 
 and shake the peac and safeti of our throne . 
 and what say you to thi ? perci , northumberland , 
 the archbishop 's grace of york , dougla , mortim 
 capitul against us and are up . 
 but wherefor do i tell these news to thee 
 whi , harri , do i tell thee of my foe , 
 which art my nearest and dearest enemi ' 
 thou that art like enough , through vassal fear , 
 base inclin , and the start of spleen , 
 to fight against me under perci 's pay , 
 to dog hi heel and curtsi at hi frown , 
 to show how much thou art degener . 
 princ . do not think so . you shall not find it so . 
 and god forgiv them that so much have sway 'd 
 your majesti 's good thought away from me ! 
 i will redeem all thi on perci 's head 
 and , in the close of some gloriou day , 
 be bold to tell you that i am your son , 
 when i will wear a garment all of blood , 
 and stain my favour in a bloodi mask , 
 which , wash 'd away , shall scour my shame with it . 
 and that shall be the day , whene' it light , 
 that thi same child of honour and renown , 
 thi gallant hotspur , thi all-prais knight , 
 and your unthought of harri chanc to meet . 
 for everi honour sit on hi helm , 
 would they were multitud , and on my head 
 my shame redoubl ! for the time will come 
 that i shall make thi northern youth exchang 
 hi gloriou deed for my indign . 
 perci is but my factor , good my lord , 
 to engross up gloriou deed on my behalf ; 
 and i will call hall to so strict account 
 that he shall render everi glori up , 
 yea , even the slightest worship of hi time , 
 or i will tear the reckon from hi heart . 
 thi in the name of god i promis here ; 
 the which if he be plea 'd i shall perform , 
 i do beseech your majesti may salv 
 the long-grown wound of my intemper . 
 if not , the end of life cancel all band , 
 and i will die a hundr thousand death 
 ere break the smallest parcel of thi vow . 
 king . a hundr thousand rebel die in thi ! 
 thou shalt have charg and sovereign trust herein . 
 
 enter blunt . 
 
 how now , good blunt ? thi look are full of speed . 
 blunt . so hath the busi that i come to speak of . 
 lord mortim of scotland hath sent word 
 that dougla and the english rebel met 
 the eleventh of thi month at shrewsburi . 
 a mighti and a fear head they are , 
 if promis be kept oil everi hand , 
 as ever off'r foul play in a state . 
 king . the earl of westmoreland set forth to-day ; 
 with him my son , lord john of lancast ; 
 for thi advertis is five day old . 
 on wednesday next , harri , you shall set forward ; 
 on thursday we ourselv will march . our meet 
 is bridgenorth ; and , harri , you shall march 
 through gloucestershir ; by which account , 
 our busi valu , some twelv day henc 
 our gener forc at bridgenorth shall meet . 
 our hand are full of busi . let 's away . 
 advantag feed him fat while men delay . exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 eastcheap . the boar 's head tavern . 
 
 enter falstaff and bardolph . 
 
 fal . bardolph , am i not fall'n away vile sinc thi last action ? 
 do i not bate ? do i not dwindl ? whi , my skin hang about me like 
 an old ladi 's loos gown ! i am wither like an old appl john . 
 well , i 'll repent , and that suddenli , while i am in some like . 
 i shall be out of heart shortli , and then i shall have no 
 strength to repent . an i have not forgotten what the insid of a 
 church is made of , i am a peppercorn , a brewer 's hors . the 
 insid of a church ! compani , villan compani , hath been the 
 spoil of me . 
 bard . sir john , you are so fret you can not live long . 
 fal . whi , there is it ! come , sing me a bawdi song ; make me merri . i 
 wa as virtuous given as a gentleman need to be , virtuou 
 enough : swore littl , dic 'd not abov seven time a week , went to 
 a bawdi hous not abov onc in a quarter- of an hour , paid money 
 that i borrowed- three or four time , live well , and in good 
 compass ; and now i live out of all order , out of all compass . 
 bard . whi , you are so fat , sir john , that you must need be out of 
 all compass- out of all reason compass , sir john . 
 fal . do thou amend thi face , and i 'll amend my life . thou art our 
 admir , thou bearest the lantern in the poop- but 't is in the 
 nose of thee . thou art the knight of the burn lamp . 
 bard . whi , sir john , my face doe you no harm . 
 fal . no , i 'll be sworn . i make as good use of it as mani a man doth 
 of a death's-head or a memento mori . i never see thi face but i 
 think upon hellfir and dive that live in purpl ; for there he 
 is in hi robe , burn , burn . if thou wert ani way given to 
 virtu , i would swear by thi face ; my oath should be 'bi thi 
 fire , that 's god 's angel . ' but thou art altogeth given over , 
 and wert inde , but for the light in thi face , the son of utter 
 dark . when thou ran'st up gadshil in the night to catch my 
 hors , if i did not think thou hadst been an igni fatuu or a 
 ball of wildfir , there 's no purchas in money . o , thou art a 
 perpetu triumph , an everlast bonfire-light ! thou hast save 
 me a thousand mark in link and torch , walk with thee in 
 the night betwixt tavern and tavern ; but the sack that thou hast 
 drunk me would have bought me light as good cheap at the dearest 
 chandler 's in europ . i have maintain that salamand of your 
 with fire ani time thi two-and-thirti year . god reward me for 
 it ! 
 bard . 'sblood , i would my face were in your belli ! 
 fal . god-a-merci ! so should i be sure to be heart-burn 'd . 
 
 enter hostess . 
 
 how now , dame partlet the hen ? have you enquir 'd yet who pick 'd 
 my pocket ? 
 host . whi , sir john , what do you think , sir john ? do you think i 
 keep thiev in my hous ? i have search 'd , i have enquir , so 
 ha my husband , man by man , boy by boy , servant by servant . the 
 tith of a hair wa never lost in my hous befor . 
 fal . ye lie , hostess . bardolph wa shav 'd and lost mani a hair , and 
 i 'll be sworn my pocket wa pick 'd . go to , you are a woman , go ! 
 host . who , i ? no ; i defi thee ! god 's light , i wa never call 'd so 
 in mine own hous befor ! 
 fal . go to , i know you well enough . 
 host . no , sir john ; you do not know me , sir john . i know you , sir 
 john . you owe me money , sir john , and now you pick a quarrel to 
 beguil me of it . i bought you a dozen of shirt to your back . 
 fal . dowla , filthi dowla ! i have given them away to baker ' 
 wive ; they have made bolter of them . 
 host . now , as i am a true woman , holland of eight shill an ell . 
 you owe money here besid , sir john , for your diet and 
 by-drink , and money lent you , four-and-twenti pound . 
 fal . he had hi part of it ; let him pay . 
 host . he ? ala , he is poor ; he hath noth . 
 fal . how ? poor ? look upon hi face . what call you rich ? let them 
 coin hi nose , let them coin hi cheek . i 'll not pay a denier . 
 what , will you make a younker of me ? shall i not take mine eas 
 in mine inn but i shall have my pocket pick 'd ? i have lost a 
 seal-r of my grandfath 's worth forti mark . 
 host . o jesu , i have heard the princ tell him , i know not how oft , 
 that that ring wa copper ! 
 fal . how ? the princ is a jack , a sneak-cup . 'sblood , an he were 
 here , i would cudgel him like a dog if he would say so . 
 
 enter the princ [ and poin ] , march ; and falstaff meet 
 them , play upon hi truncheon like a fife . 
 
 how now , lad ? is the wind in that door , i ' faith ? must we all 
 march ? 
 bard . yea , two and two , newgat fashion . 
 host . my lord , i pray you hear me . 
 princ . what say'st thou , mistress quickli ? how doth thi husband ? 
 i love him well ; he is an honest man . 
 host . good my lord , hear me . 
 fal . prithe let her alon and list to me . 
 princ . what say'st thou , jack ? 
 fal . the other night i fell asleep here behind the arra and had my 
 pocket pick 'd . thi hous is turn 'd bawdi hous ; they pick 
 pocket . 
 princ . what didst thou lose , jack ? 
 fal . wilt thou believ me , hal ? three or four bond of forti pound 
 apiec and a seal-r of my grandfath 's . 
 princ . a trifl , some eightpenni matter . 
 host . so i told him , my lord , and i said i heard your grace say so ; 
 and , my lord , he speak most vile of you , like a foul-mouth 'd 
 man as he is , and said he would cudgel you . 
 princ . what ! he did not ? 
 host . there 's neither faith , truth , nor womanhood in me els . 
 fal . there 's no more faith in thee than in a stew prune , nor no 
 more truth in thee than in a drawn fox ; and for woman-hood , maid 
 marian may be the deputi 's wife of the ward to thee . go , you 
 thing , go ! 
 host . say , what thing ? what thing ? 
 fal . what thing ? whi , a thing to thank god on . 
 host . i am no thing to thank god on , i would thou shouldst know it ! 
 i am an honest man 's wife , and , set thi knight-hood asid , 
 thou art a knave to call me so . 
 fal . set thi womanhood asid , thou art a beast to say 
 otherwis . 
 host . say , what beast , thou knave , thou ? 
 fal . what beast ? whi , an otter . 
 princ . an otter , sir john ? whi an otter ? 
 fal . whi , she 's neither fish nor flesh ; a man know not where to 
 have her . 
 host . thou art an unjust man in say so . thou or ani man know 
 where to have me , thou knave , thou ! 
 princ . thou say'st true , hostess , and he slander thee most 
 grossli . 
 host . so he doth you , my lord , and said thi other day you ought 
 him a thousand pound . 
 princ . sirrah , do i owe you a thousand pound ? 
 fal . a thousand pound , hal ? a million ! thi love is worth a million ; 
 thou owest me thi love . 
 host . nay , my lord , he call 'd you jack and said he would cudgel 
 you . 
 fal . did i , bardolph ? 
 bard . inde , sir john , you said so . 
 fal . yea . if he said my ring wa copper . 
 princ . i say , 't is copper . darest thou be as good as thi word now ? 
 fal . whi , hal , thou knowest , as thou art but man , i dare ; but as 
 thou art princ , i fear thee as i fear the roar of the lion 's 
 whelp . 
 princ . and whi not as the lion ? 
 fal . the king himself is to be fear as the lion . dost thou think 
 i 'll fear thee as i fear thi father ? nay , an i do , i pray god my 
 girdl break . 
 princ . o , if it should , how would thi gut fall about thi knee ! 
 but , sirrah , there 's no room for faith , truth , nor honesti in 
 thi bosom of thine . it is all fill 'd up with gut and midriff . 
 charg an honest woman with pick thi pocket ? whi , thou 
 whoreson , impud , emboss 'd rascal , if there were anyth in 
 thi pocket but tavern reckon , memorandum of bawdi hous , 
 and one poor pennyworth of sugar candi to make thee long-winded- 
 if thi pocket were enrich 'd with ani other injuri but these , i 
 am a villain . and yet you will stand to it ; you will not pocket 
 up wrong . art thou not asham ? 
 fal . dost thou hear , hal ? thou knowest in the state of innoc 
 adam fell ; and what should poor jack falstaff do in the day of 
 villani ? thou seest i have more flesh than anoth man , and 
 therefor more frailti . you confess then , you pick 'd my pocket ? 
 princ . it appear so by the stori . 
 fal . hostess , i forgiv thee . go make readi breakfast . love thi 
 husband , look to thi servant , cherish thi guest . thou shalt 
 find me tractabl to ani honest reason . thou seest i am pacifi . 
 -still ? - nay , prithe be gone . [ exit hostess . ] now , hal , to the 
 news at court . for the robberi , lad- how is that answer ? 
 princ . o my sweet beef , i must still be good angel to thee . 
 the money is paid back again . 
 fal . o , i do not like that pay back ! 't is a doubl labour . 
 princ . i am good friend with my father , and may do anyth . 
 fal . rob me the exchequ the first thing thou doest , and do it 
 with unwash 'd hand too . 
 bard . do , my lord . 
 princ . i have procur thee , jack , a charg of foot . 
 fal . i would it had been of hors . where shall i find one that can 
 steal well ? o for a fine thief of the age of two-and-twenti or 
 thereabout ! i am heinous unprovid . well , god be thank for 
 these rebel . they offend none but the virtuou . i laud them , i 
 prais them . 
 princ . bardolph ! 
 bard . my lord ? 
 princ . go bear thi letter to lord john of lancast , 
 to my brother john ; thi to my lord of westmoreland . 
 [ exit bardolph . ] 
 go , poin , to hors , to hors ; for thou and i 
 have thirti mile to ride yet ere dinner time . 
 [ exit poin . ] 
 jack , meet me to-morrow in the templ hall 
 at two o'clock in the afternoon . 
 there shalt thou know thi charg . and there receiv 
 money and order for their furnitur . 
 the land is burn ; perci stand on high ; 
 and either they or we must lower lie . [ exit . ] 
 fal . rare word ! brave world ! hostess , my breakfast , come . 
 o , i could wish thi tavern were my drum ! 
 exit . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the rebel camp near shrewsburi . 
 
 enter harri hotspur , worcest , and dougla . 
 
 hot . well said , my nobl scot . if speak truth 
 in thi fine age were not thought flatteri , 
 such attribut should the dougla have 
 as not a soldier of thi season 's stamp 
 should go so gener current through the world . 
 by god , i can not flatter , i defi 
 the tongu of soother ! but a braver place 
 in my heart 's love hath no man than yourself . 
 nay , task me to my word ; approv me , lord . 
 doug . thou art the king of honour . 
 no man so potent breath upon the ground 
 but i will beard him . 
 
 enter one with letter . 
 
 hot . do so , and 't is well.- 
 what letter hast thou there ? - i can but thank you . 
 messeng . these letter come from your father . 
 hot . letter from him ? whi come he not himself ? 
 mess . he can not come , my lord ; he is grievou sick . 
 hot . zound ! how ha he the leisur to be sick 
 in such a justl time ? who lead hi power ? 
 under whose govern come they along ? 
 mess . hi letter bear hi mind , not i , my lord . 
 wor . i prithe tell me , doth he keep hi bed ? 
 mess . he did , my lord , four day ere i set forth , 
 and at the time of my departur thenc 
 he wa much fear 'd by hi physician . 
 wor . i would the state of time had first been whole 
 ere he by sick had been visit . 
 hi health wa never better worth than now . 
 hot . sick now ? droop now ? thi sick doth infect 
 the veri lifeblood of our enterpris . 
 't is catch hither , even to our camp . 
 he write me here that inward sickness- 
 and that hi friend by deput could not 
 so soon be drawn ; no did he think it meet 
 to lay so danger and dear a trust 
 on ani soul remov 'd but on hi own . 
 yet doth he give us bold advertis , 
 that with our small conjunct we should on , 
 to see how fortun is dispo 'd to us ; 
 for , as he write , there is no quail now , 
 becaus the king is certainli possess 'd 
 of all our purpos . what say you to it ? 
 wor . your father 's sick is a maim to us . 
 hot . a peril gash , a veri limb lopp 'd off . 
 and yet , in faith , it is not ! hi present want 
 seem more than we shall find it . were it good 
 to set the exact wealth of all our state 
 all at one cast ? to set so rich a man 
 on the nice hazard of one doubt hour ? 
 it were not good ; for therein should we read 
 the veri bottom and the soul of hope , 
 the veri list , the veri utmost bound 
 of all our fortun . 
 doug . faith , and so we should ; 
 where now remain a sweet revers . 
 we may boldli spend upon the hope of what 
 is to come in . 
 a comfort of retir live in thi . 
 hot . a rendezv , a home to fli unto , 
 if that the devil and mischanc look big 
 upon the maidenhead of our affair . 
 wor . but yet i would your father had been here . 
 the qualiti and hair of our attempt 
 brook no divis . it will be thought 
 by some that know not whi he is away , 
 that wisdom , loyalti , and mere dislik 
 of our proceed kept the earl from henc . 
 and think how such an apprehens 
 may turn the tide of fear faction 
 and breed a kind of question in our caus . 
 for well you know we of the off'r side 
 must keep aloof from strict arbitr , 
 and stop all sight-hol , everi loop from whenc 
 the eye of reason may pri in upon us . 
 thi absenc of your father 's draw a curtain 
 that show the ignor a kind of fear 
 befor not dreamt of . 
 hot . you strain too far . 
 i rather of hi absenc make thi use : 
 it lend a lustr and more great opinion , 
 a larger dare to our great enterpris , 
 than if the earl were here ; for men must think , 
 if we , without hi help , can make a head 
 to push against a kingdom , with hi help 
 we shall o'erturn it topsy-turvi down . 
 yet all goe well ; yet all our joint are whole . 
 doug . as heart can think . there is not such a word 
 spoke of in scotland as thi term of fear . 
 
 enter sir richard vernon . 
 
 hot . my cousin vernon ! welcom , by my soul . 
 ver . pray god my news be worth a welcom , lord . 
 the earl of westmoreland , seven thousand strong , 
 is march hitherward ; with him princ john . 
 hot . no harm . what more ? 
 ver . and further , i have learn 'd 
 the king himself in person is set forth , 
 or hitherward intend speedili , 
 with strong and mighti prepar . 
 hot . he shall be welcom too . where is hi son , 
 the nimble-foot madcap princ of wale , 
 and hi comrad , that daff 'd the world asid 
 and bid it pass ? 
 ver . all furnish 'd , all in arm ; 
 all plum 'd like estridg that with the wind 
 bate like eagl have late bath 'd ; 
 glitter in golden coat like imag ; 
 as full of spirit as the month of may 
 and gorgeou as the sun at midsumm ; 
 wanton as youth goat , wild as young bull . 
 i saw young harri with hi beaver on 
 hi cush on hi thigh , gallantli arm 'd , 
 rise from the ground like feather mercuri , 
 and vault with such eas into hi seat 
 as if an angel dropp 'd down from the cloud 
 to turn and wind a fieri pegasu 
 and witch the world with nobl horsemanship . 
 hot . no more , no more ! wors than the sun in march , 
 thi prais doth nourish agu . let them come . 
 they come like sacrific in their trim , 
 and to the fire-ey 'd maid of smoki war 
 all hot and bleed will we offer them . 
 the mail mar shall on hi altar sit 
 up to the ear in blood . i am on fire 
 to hear thi rich repris is so nigh , 
 and yet not our . come , let me tast my hors , 
 who is to bear me like a thunderbolt 
 against the bosom of the princ of wale . 
 harri to harri shall , hot hors to hors , 
 meet , and ne'er part till one drop down a cors . 
 that glendow were come ! 
 ver . there is more news . 
 i learn 'd in worcest , as i rode along , 
 he can not draw hi power thi fourteen day . 
 doug . that 's the worst tide that i hear of yet . 
 wor . ay , by my faith , that bear a frosti sound . 
 hot . what may the king 's whole battl reach unto ? 
 ver . to thirti thousand . 
 hot . forti let it be . 
 my father and glendow be both away , 
 the power of us may serv so great a day . 
 come , let us take a muster speedili . 
 doomsday is near . die all , die merrili . 
 doug . talk not of die . i am out of fear 
 of death or death 's hand for thi one half-year . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a public road near coventri . 
 
 enter falstaff and bardolph . 
 
 fal . bardolph , get thee befor to coventri ; fill me a bottl of 
 sack . our soldier shall march through . we 'll to sutton co'fil ' 
 to-night . 
 bard . will you give me money , captain ? 
 fal . lay out , lay out . 
 bald . thi bottl make an angel . 
 fal . an if it do , take it for thi labour ; an if it make twenti , 
 take them all ; i 'll answer the coinag . bid my lieuten peto 
 meet me at town 's end . 
 bard . i will , captain . farewel . exit . 
 fal . if i be not asham of my soldier , i am a sou 'd gurnet . i 
 have misus the king 's press damnabl . i have got in exchang of 
 a hundr and fifti soldier , three hundr and odd pound . i 
 press me none but good household , yeomen 's son ; inquir me 
 out contract bachelor , such as had been ask 'd twice on the 
 banes- such a commod of warm slave as had as liev hear the 
 devil as a drum ; such as fear the report of a caliv wors than 
 a struck fowl or a hurt wild duck . i press 'd me none but such 
 toasts-and-butt , with heart in their belli no bigger than 
 pin ' head , and they have bought out their servic ; and now my 
 whole charg consist of ancient , corpor , lieuten , 
 gentlemen of companies- slave as rag as lazaru in the 
 paint cloth , where the glutton 's dog lick hi sore ; and 
 such as inde were never soldier , but discard unjust 
 serving-men , younger son to younger brother , revolt tapster , 
 and ostler trade-fall'n ; the canker of a calm world and a long 
 peac ; ten time more dishonour rag than an old fac 'd 
 ancient ; and such have i to fill up the room of them that have 
 bought out their servic that you would think that i had a 
 hundr and fifti tatter prodig late come from 
 swine-keep , from eat draff and husk . a mad fellow met me 
 on the way , and told me i had unload all the gibbet and 
 press 'd the dead bodi . no eye hath seen such scarecrow . i 'll 
 not march through coventri with them , that 's flat . nay , and the 
 villain march wide betwixt the leg , as if they had gyve on ; 
 for inde i had the most of them out of prison . there 's but a 
 shirt and a half in all my compani ; and the half-shirt is two 
 napkin tack 'd togeth and thrown over the shoulder like a 
 herald 's coat without sleev ; and the shirt , to say the truth , 
 stol'n from my host at saint alban 's , or the red-nos innkeep 
 of daventri . but that 's all one ; they 'll find linen enough on 
 everi hedg . 
 
 enter the princ and the lord of westmoreland . 
 
 princ . how now , blown jack ? how now , quilt ? 
 fal . what , hal ? how now , mad wag ? what a devil dost thou in 
 warwickshir ? my good lord of westmoreland , i cri you merci . i 
 thought your honour had alreadi been at shrewsburi . 
 west . faith , sir john , 't is more than time that i were there , and 
 you too ; but my power are there alreadi . the king , i can tell 
 you , look for us all . we must away all , to-night . 
 fal . tut , never fear me . i am as vigil as a cat to steal cream . 
 princ . i think , to steal cream inde , for thi theft hath alreadi 
 made thee butter . but tell me , jack , whose fellow are these that 
 come after ? 
 fal . mine , hal , mine . 
 princ . i did never see such piti rascal . 
 fal . tut , tut ! good enough to toss ; food for powder , food for 
 powder . they 'll fill a pit as well as better . tush , man , mortal 
 men , mortal men . 
 west . ay , but , sir john , methink they are exceed poor and bare- 
 too beggarli . 
 fal . faith , for their poverti , i know , not where they had that ; and 
 for their bare , i am surd they never learn 'd that of me . 
 princ . no , i 'll be sworn , unless you call three finger on the 
 rib bare . but , sirrah , make hast . perci 's alreadi in the 
 field . 
 exit . 
 fal . what , is the king encamp 'd ? 
 west . he is , sir john . i fear we shall stay too long . 
 [ exit . ] 
 fal . well , 
 to the latter end of a fray and the begin of a feast 
 fit a dull fighter and a keen guest . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the rebel camp near shrewsburi . 
 
 enter hotspur , worcest , dougla , vernon . 
 
 hot . we 'll fight with him to-night . 
 wor . it may not be . 
 doug . you give him then advantag . 
 ver . not a whit . 
 hot . whi say you so ? look he no for suppli ? 
 ver . so do we . 
 hot . hi is certain , our 's doubt . 
 wor . good cousin , be advi 'd ; stir not to-night . 
 ver . do not , my lord . 
 doug . you do not counsel well . 
 you speak it out of fear and cold heart . 
 ver . do me no slander , dougla . by my life- 
 and i dare well maintain it with my life- 
 if well-respect honour bid me on 
 i hold as littl counsel with weak fear 
 as you , my lord , or ani scot that thi day live . 
 let it be seen to-morrow in the battl 
 which of us fear . 
 doug . yea , or to-night . 
 ver . content . 
 hot . to-night , say i . 
 come , come , it may not be . i wonder much , 
 be men of such great lead as you are , 
 that you forese not what impedi 
 drag back our expedit . certain hors 
 of my cousin vernon 's are not yet come up . 
 your uncl worcest 's hors came but to-day ; 
 and now their pride and mettl is asleep , 
 their courag with hard labour tame and dull , 
 that not a hors is half the half of himself . 
 hot . so are the hors of the enemi , 
 in gener journey-b and brought low . 
 the better part of our are full of rest . 
 wor . the number of the king exceedeth our . 
 for god 's sake , cousin , stay till all come in . 
 
 the trumpet sound a parley . 
 
 enter sir walter blunt . 
 
 blunt . i come with graciou offer from the king , 
 if you vouchsaf me hear and respect . 
 hot . welcom , sir walter blunt , and would to god 
 you were of our determin ! 
 some of us love you well ; and even those some 
 envi your great deserv and good name , 
 becaus you are not of our qualiti , 
 but stand against us like an enemi . 
 blunt . and god defend but still i should stand so , 
 so long as out of limit and true rule 
 you stand against anoint majesti ! 
 but to my charg . the king hath sent to know 
 the natur of your grief ; and whereupon 
 you conjur from the breast of civil peac 
 such bold hostil , teach hi duteou land 
 audaci cruelti . if that the king 
 have ani way your good desert forgot , 
 which he confesseth to be manifold , 
 he bid you name your grief , and with all speed 
 you shall have your desir with interest , 
 and pardon absolut for yourself and these 
 herein misl by your suggest . 
 hot . the king is kind ; and well we know the king 
 know at what time to promis , when to pay . 
 my father and my uncl and myself 
 did give him that same royalti he wear ; 
 and when he wa not six-and-twenti strong , 
 sick in the world 's regard , wretch and low , 
 a poor unmind outlaw sneak home , 
 my father gave him welcom to the shore ; 
 and when he heard him swear and vow to god 
 he came but to be duke of lancast , 
 to sue hi liveri and beg hi peac , 
 with tear of innoc and term of zeal , 
 my father , in kind heart and piti mov 'd , 
 swore him assist , and perform it too . 
 now , when the lord and baron of the realm 
 perceiv 'd northumberland did lean to him , 
 the more and less came in with cap and knee ; 
 met him on borough , citi , villag , 
 attend him on bridg , stood in lane , 
 laid gift befor him , proffer 'd him their oath , 
 give him their heir as page , follow him 
 even at the heel in golden multitud . 
 he present , as great know itself , 
 step me a littl higher than hi vow 
 made to my father , while hi blood wa poor , 
 upon the nake shore at ravenspurgh ; 
 and now , forsooth , take on him to reform 
 some certain edict and some strait decre 
 that lie too heavi on the commonwealth ; 
 cri out upon abus , seem to weep 
 over hi countri 's wrong ; and by thi face , 
 thi seem brow of justic , did he win 
 the heart of all that he did angl for ; 
 proceed further- cut me off the head 
 of all the favourit that the absent king 
 in deput left behind him here 
 when he wa person in the irish war . 
 but . tut ! i came not to hear thi . 
 hot . then to the point . 
 in short time after lie depo 'd the king ; 
 soon after that depriv 'd him of hi life ; 
 and in the neck of that task 'd the whole state ; 
 to make that wors , suff'r hi kinsman march 
 ( who is , if everi owner were well placid , 
 inde hi king ) to be engag 'd in wale , 
 there without ransom to lie forfeit ; 
 disgrac 'd me in my happi victori , 
 sought to entrap me by intellig ; 
 rate mine uncl from the council board ; 
 in rage dismiss 'd my father from the court ; 
 broke an oath on oath , commit wrong on wrong ; 
 and in conclus drove us to seek out 
 thi head of safeti , and withal to pri 
 into hi titl , the which we find 
 too indirect for long continu . 
 blunt . shall i return thi answer to the king ? 
 hot . not so , sir walter . we 'll withdraw awhil . 
 go to the king ; and let there be impawn 'd 
 some sureti for a safe return again , 
 and in the morn earli shall mine uncl 
 bring him our purpos ; and so farewel . 
 blunt . i would you would accept of grace and love . 
 hot . and may be so we shall . 
 blunt . pray god you do . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 york . the archbishop 's palac . 
 
 enter the archbishop of york and sir michael . 
 
 arch . hie , good sir michael ; bear thi seal brief 
 with wing hast to the lord marshal ; 
 thi to my cousin scroop ; and all the rest 
 to whom they are direct . if you knew 
 how much they do import , you would make hast . 
 sir m. my good lord , 
 i guess their tenour . 
 arch . like enough you do . 
 to-morrow , good sir michael , is a day 
 wherein the fortun of ten thousand men 
 must bide the touch ; for , sir , at shrewsburi , 
 as i am truli given to understand , 
 the king with mighti and quick-rais power 
 meet with lord harri ; and i fear , sir michael , 
 what with the sick of northumberland , 
 whose power wa in the first proport , 
 and what with owen glendow 's absenc thenc , 
 who with them wa a rate sinew too 
 and come not in , overrul 'd by prophecies- 
 i fear the power of perci is too weak 
 to wage an instant trial with the king . 
 sir m. whi , my good lord , you need not fear ; 
 there is dougla and lord mortim . 
 arch . no , mortim is not there . 
 sir m. but there is mordak , vernon , lord harri perci , 
 and there is my lord of worcest , and a head 
 of gallant warrior , nobl gentlemen . 
 arch . and so there is ; but yet the king hath drawn 
 the special head of all the land together- 
 the princ of wale , lord john of lancast , 
 the nobl westmoreland and warlik blunt , 
 and mani moe corriv and dear men 
 of estim and command in arm . 
 sir m. doubt not , my lord , they shall be well oppo 'd . 
 arch . i hope no less , yet need 't is to fear ; 
 and , to prevent the worst , sir michael , speed . 
 for if lord perci thrive not , ere the king 
 dismiss hi power , he mean to visit us , 
 for he hath heard of our confederaci , 
 and 't is but wisdom to make strong against him . 
 therefor make hast . i must go write again 
 to other friend ; and so farewel , sir michael . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the king 's camp near shrewsburi . 
 
 enter the king , princ of wale , lord john of lancast , sir walter blunt , 
 falstaff . 
 
 king . how bloodili the sun begin to peer 
 abov yon buski hill ! the day look pale 
 at hi distemp'ratur . 
 princ . the southern wind 
 doth play the trumpet to hi purpos 
 and by hi hollow whistl in the leav 
 foretel a tempest and a blust'r day . 
 king . theft with the loser let it sympath , 
 for noth can seem foul to those that win . 
 
 the trumpet sound . enter worcest [ and vernon ] . 
 
 how , now , my lord of worcest ? 't is not well 
 that you and i should meet upon such term 
 as now we meet . you have deceiv 'd our trust 
 and made us doff our easi robe of peac 
 to crush our old limb in ungentl steel . 
 thi is not well , my lord ; thi is not well . 
 what say you to it ? will you again unknit 
 thi churlish knot of all-abhor war , 
 and move in that obedi orb again 
 where you did give a fair and natur light , 
 and be no more an exhal 'd meteor , 
 a prodigi of fear , and a portent 
 of broach mischief to the unborn time ? 
 wor . hear me , my lieg . 
 for mine own part , i could be well content 
 to entertain the lag-end of my life 
 with quiet hour ; for i do protest 
 i have not sought the day of thi dislik . 
 king . you have not sought it ! how come it then , 
 fal . rebellion lay in hi way , and he found it . 
 princ . peac , chewet , peac ! 
 wor . it plea 'd your majesti to turn your look 
 of favour from myself and all our hous ; 
 and yet i must rememb you , my lord , 
 we were the first and dearest of your friend . 
 for you my staff of offic did i break 
 in richard 's time , and post day and night 
 to meet you on the way and kiss your hand 
 when yet you were in place and in account 
 noth so strong and fortun as i . 
 it wa myself , my brother , and hi son 
 that brought you home and boldli did outdar 
 the danger of the time . you swore to us , 
 and you did swear that oath at doncast , 
 that you did noth purpos 'gainst the state , 
 nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right , 
 the seat of gaunt , dukedom of lancast . 
 to thi we swore our aid . but in short space 
 it it rain 'd down fortun show'r on your head , 
 and such a flood of great fell on you- 
 what with our help , what with the absent king , 
 what with the injuri of a wanton time , 
 the seem suffer that you had born , 
 and the contrari wind that held the king 
 so long in hi unlucki irish war 
 that all in england did reput him dead- 
 and from thi swarm of fair advantag 
 you took occas to be quickli woo 'd 
 to gripe the gener sway into your hand ; 
 forgot your oath to us at doncast ; 
 and , be fed by us , you us 'd us so 
 as that ungentl gull , the cuckoo 's bird , 
 useth the sparrow- did oppress our nest ; 
 grew , by our feed to so great a bulk 
 that even our love thirst not come near your sight 
 for fear of swallow ; but with nimbl wing 
 we were enforc 'd for safeti sake to fli 
 out of your sight and rais thi present head ; 
 wherebi we stand oppos by such mean 
 as you yourself have forg 'd against yourself 
 by unkind usag , danger counten , 
 and violat of all faith and troth 
 sworn to ti in your younger enterpris . 
 king . these thing , inde , you have articul , 
 proclaim 'd at market cross , read in church , 
 to face the garment of rebellion 
 with some fine colour that may pleas the eye 
 of fickl changel and poor discont , 
 which gape and rub the elbow at the news 
 of hurlyburli innov . 
 and never yet did insurrect want 
 such water colour to impaint hi caus , 
 nor moodi beggar , starv for a time 
 of pell-mel havoc and confus . 
 princ . in both our armi there is mani a soul 
 shall pay full dearli for thi encount , 
 if onc they join in trial . tell your nephew 
 the princ of wale doth join with all the world 
 in prais of henri perci . by my hope , 
 thi present enterpris set off hi head , 
 i do not think a braver gentleman , 
 more active-vali or more valiant-young , 
 more dare or more bold , is now aliv 
 to grace thi latter age with nobl deed . 
 for my part , i may speak it to my shame , 
 i have a truant been to chivalri ; 
 and so i hear he doth account me too . 
 yet thi befor my father 's majesty- 
 i am content that he shall take the odd 
 of hi great name and estim , 
 and will to save the blood on either side , 
 tri fortun with him in a singl fight . 
 king . and , princ of wale , so dare we ventur thee , 
 albeit consider infinit 
 do make against it . no , good worcest , no ! 
 we love our peopl well ; even those we love 
 that are misl upon your cousin 's part ; 
 and , will they take the offer of our grace , 
 both he , and they , and you , yea , everi man 
 shall be my friend again , and i 'll be hi . 
 so tell your cousin , and bring me word 
 what he will do . but if he will not yield , 
 rebuk and dread correct wait on us , 
 and they shall do their offic . so be gone . 
 we will not now be troubl with repli . 
 we offer fair ; take it advisedli . 
 exit worcest [ with vernon ] 
 princ . it will not be accept , on my life . 
 the dougla and the hotspur both togeth 
 are confid against the world in arm . 
 king . henc , therefor , everi leader to hi charg ; 
 for , on their answer , will we set on them , 
 and god befriend us as our caus is just ! 
 exeunt . manent princ , falstaff . 
 fal . hal , if thou see me down in the battl and bestrid me , so ! 
 't is a point of friendship . 
 princ . noth but a colossu can do thee that friendship . 
 say thi prayer , and farewel . 
 fal . i would 'twere bedtim , hal , and all well . 
 princ . whi , thou owest god a death . 
 exit . 
 fal . 't is not due yet . i would be loath to pay him befor hi day . 
 what need i be so forward with him that call not on me ? well , 
 't is no matter ; honour prick me on . yea , but how if honour prick 
 me off when i come on ? how then ? can honor set to a leg ? no . or 
 an arm ? no . or take away the grief of a wound ? no . honour hath no 
 skill in surgeri then ? no . what is honour ? a word . what is that 
 word honour ? air . a trim reckon ! who hath it ? he that die a 
 wednesday . doth he feel it ? no . doth be bear it ? no . 't is 
 insens then ? yea , to the dead . but will it not live with the 
 live ? no . whi ? detract will not suffer it . therefor i 'll 
 none of it . honour is a mere scutcheon- and so end my catech . 
 exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the rebel camp . 
 
 enter worcest and sir richard vernon . 
 
 wor . o no , my nephew must not know , sir richard , 
 the liber and kind offer of the king . 
 ver . 'twere best he did . 
 wor . then are we all undon . 
 it is not possibl , it can not be 
 the king should keep hi word in love us . 
 he will suspect us still and find a time 
 to punish thi offenc in other fault . 
 suspicion all our live shall be stuck full of eye ; 
 for treason is but trust like the fox 
 who , ne'er so tame , so cherish 'd and lock 'd up , 
 will have a wild trick of hi ancestor . 
 look how we can , or sad or merrili , 
 interpret will misquot our look , 
 and we shall feed like oxen at a stall , 
 the better cherish 'd , still the nearer death . 
 my nephew 's trespass may be well forgot ; 
 it hath the excus of youth and heat of blood , 
 and an adopt name of privilege- 
 a hare-brain hotspur govern 'd by a spleen . 
 all hi offenc live upon my head 
 and on hi father 's . we did train him on ; 
 and , hi corrupt be taken from us , 
 we , as the spring of all , shall pay for all . 
 therefor , good cousin , let not harri know , 
 in ani case , the offer of the king . 
 
 enter hotspur [ and dougla ] . 
 
 ver . deliv what you will , i 'll say 't is so . 
 here come your cousin . 
 hot . my uncl is return 'd . 
 deliv up my lord of westmoreland . 
 uncl , what news ? 
 wor . the king will bid you battl present . 
 doug . defi him by the lord of westmoreland . 
 hot . lord dougla , go you and tell him so . 
 doug . marri , and shall , and veri willingli . 
 exit . 
 wor . there is no seem merci in the king . 
 hot . did you beg ani , god forbid ! 
 wor . i told him gentli of our grievanc , 
 of hi oath-break ; which he mend thu , 
 by now forswear that he is forsworn . 
 he call us rebel , traitor , aid will scourg 
 with haughti arm thi hate name in us . 
 
 enter dougla . 
 
 doug . arm , gentlemen ! to arm ! for i have thrown 
 a brave defianc in king henri 's teeth , 
 and westmoreland , that wa engag 'd , did bear it ; 
 which can not choos but bring him quickli on . 
 wor . the princ of wale stepp 'd forth befor the king 
 and , nephew , challeng 'd you to singl fight . 
 hot . o , would the quarrel lay upon our head , 
 and that no man might draw short breath to-day 
 but i and harri monmouth ! tell me , tell me , 
 how show 'd hi task ? seem 'd it in contempt ? 
 no , by my soul . i never in my life 
 did hear a challeng urg 'd more modestli , 
 unless a brother should a brother dare 
 to gentl exercis and proof of arm . 
 he gave you all the duti of a man ; 
 trimm 'd up your prais with a princ tongu ; 
 spoke your deserv like a chronicl ; 
 make you ever better than hi prais 
 by still disprais prais valu with you ; 
 and , which becam him like a princ inde , 
 he made a blush cital of himself , 
 and chid hi truant youth with such a grace 
 as if lie mast'r there a doubl spirit 
 of teach and of learn instantli . 
 there did he paus ; but let me tell the world , 
 if he outliv the envi of thi day , 
 england did never owe so sweet a hope , 
 so much misconstru in hi wanton . 
 hot . cousin , i think thou art enamour 
 upon hi folli . never did i hear 
 of ani princ so wild a libertin . 
 but be he as he will , yet onc ere night 
 i will embrac him with a soldier 's arm , 
 that he shall shrink under my courtesi . 
 arm , arm with speed ! and , fellow , soldier , friend , 
 better consid what you have to do 
 than i , that have not well the gift of tongu , 
 can lift your blood up with persuas . 
 
 enter a messeng . 
 
 mess . my lord , here are letter for you . 
 hot . i can not read them now.- 
 o gentlemen , the time of life is short ! 
 to spend that short base were too long 
 if life did ride upon a dial 's point , 
 still end at the arriv of an hour . 
 an if we live , we live to tread on king ; 
 if die , brave death , when princ die with us ! 
 now for our conscienc , the arm are fair , 
 when the intent of bear them is just . 
 
 enter anoth messeng . 
 
 mess . my lord , prepar . the king come on apac . 
 hot . i thank him that he cut me from my tale , 
 for i profess not talk . onli this- 
 let each man do hi best ; and here draw i 
 a sword whose temper i intend to stain 
 with the best blood that i can meet withal 
 in the adventur of thi peril day . 
 now , esper ! perci ! and set on . 
 sound all the lofti instrument of war , 
 and by that music let us all embrac ; 
 for , heaven to earth , some of us never shall 
 a second time do such a courtesi . 
 here they embrac . the trumpet sound . 
 [ exeunt . ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 plain between the camp . 
 
 the king enter with hi power . alarum to the battl . then enter dougla 
 and sir walter blunt . 
 
 blunt . what is thi name , that in the battl thu 
 thou crossest me ? what honour dost thou seek 
 upon my head ? 
 doug . know then my name is dougla , 
 and i do haunt thee in the battl thu 
 becaus some tell me that thou art a king . 
 blunt . they tell thee true . 
 doug . the lord of stafford dear to-day hath bought 
 thi like ; for instead of thee , king harri , 
 thi sword hath end him . so shall it thee , 
 unless thou yield thee as my prison . 
 blunt . i wa not born a yielder , thou proud scot ; 
 and thou shalt find a king that will reveng 
 lord stafford 's death . 
 
 they fight . dougla kill blunt . then enter hotspur . 
 
 hot . o dougla , hadst thou fought at holmedon thu , 
 i never had triumph 'd upon a scot . 
 doug . all 's done , all 's won . here breathless lie the king . 
 hot . where ? 
 doug . here . 
 hot . thi , dougla ? no . i know thi face full well . 
 a gallant knight he wa , hi name wa blunt ; 
 semblabl furnish 'd like the king himself . 
 doug . a fool go with thi soul , whither it goe ! 
 a borrow titl hast thou bought too dear : 
 whi didst thou tell me that thou wert a king ? 
 hot . the king hath mani march in hi coat . 
 doug . now , by my sword , i will kill all hi coat ; 
 i 'll murder all hi wardrop , piec by piec , 
 until i meet the king . 
 hot . up and away ! 
 our soldier stand full fairli for the day . 
 exeunt . 
 
 alarum . enter falstaff solu . 
 
 fal . though i could scape shot-fre at london , i fear the shot 
 here . here 's no score but upon the pate . soft ! who are you ? 
 sir walter blunt . there 's honour for you ! here 's no vaniti ! i am 
 as hot as molten lead , and as heavi too . god keep lead out of me ! 
 i need no more weight than mine own bowel . i have led my 
 rag-of-muffin where they are pepper 'd . there 's not three of my 
 hundr and fifti left aliv ; and they are for the town 's end , to 
 beg dure life . but who come here ? 
 
 enter the princ . 
 
 princ . what , stand'st thou idl here ? lend me thi sword . 
 mani a nobleman lie stark and stiff 
 under the hoof of vaunt enemi , 
 whose death are yet unreveng 'd . i prithe 
 rend me thi sword . 
 fal . o hal , i prithe give me leav to breath awhil . turk gregori 
 never did such deed in arm as i have done thi day . i have paid 
 perci ; i have made him sure . 
 princ . he is inde , and live to kill thee . 
 i prithe lend me thi sword . 
 fal . nay , befor god , hal , if perci be aliv , thou get'st not my 
 sword ; but take my pistol , if thou wilt . 
 princ . give it me . what , is it in the case ? 
 fal . ay , hal . 't is hot , 't is hot . there 's that will sack a citi . 
 
 the princ draw it out and find it to he a bottl of sack . 
 
 what , is it a time to jest and dalli now ? 
 he throw the bottl at him . exit . 
 fal . well , if perci be aliv , i 'll pierc him . if he do come in my 
 way , so ; if he do not , if i come in hi willingli , let him make a 
 carbonado of me . i like not such grin honour as sir walter 
 hath . give me life ; which if i can save , so ; if not , honour come 
 unlook 'd for , and there 's an end . exit . 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 anoth part of the field . 
 
 alarum . excurs . enter the king , the princ , lord john of lancast , 
 earl of westmoreland 
 
 king . i prithe , 
 harri , withdraw thyself ; thou bleedest too much . 
 lord john of lancast , go you unto him . 
 john . not i , my lord , unless i did bleed too . 
 princ . i do beseech your majesti make up , 
 lest your retir do amaz your friend . 
 king . i will do so . 
 my lord of westmoreland , lead him to hi tent . 
 west . come , my lord , i 'll lead you to your tent . 
 princ . lead me , my lord , i do not need your help ; 
 and god forbid a shallow scratch should drive 
 the princ of wale from such a field as thi , 
 where stain 'd nobil lie trodden on , 
 and rebel ' arm triumph in massacr ! 
 john . we breath too long . come , cousin westmoreland , 
 our duti thi way lie . for god 's sake , come . 
 [ exeunt princ john and westmoreland . ] 
 princ . by god , thou hast deceiv 'd me , lancast ! 
 i did not think thee lord of such a spirit . 
 befor , i lov 'd thee as a brother , john ; 
 but now , i do respect thee as my soul . 
 king . i saw him hold lord perci at the point 
 with lustier mainten than i did look for 
 of such an ungrown warrior . 
 princ . o , thi boy 
 lend mettl to us all ! exit . 
 
 enter dougla . 
 
 doug . anoth king ? they grow like hydra 's head . 
 i am the dougla , fatal to all those 
 that wear those colour on them . what art thou 
 that counterfeit'st the person of a king ? 
 king . the king himself , who , dougla , griev at heart 
 so mani of hi shadow thou hast met , 
 and not the veri king . i have two boy 
 seek perci and thyself about the field ; 
 but , see thou fall'st on me so luckili , 
 i will assay thee . so defend thyself . 
 doug . i fear thou art anoth counterfeit ; 
 and yet , in faith , thou bearest thee like a king . 
 but mine i am sure thou art , whoe'er thou be , 
 and thu i win thee . 
 
 they fight . the king be in danger , enter princ of wale . 
 
 princ . hold up thi head , vile scot , or thou art like 
 never to hold it up again ! the spirit 
 of valiant shirley , stafford , blunt are in my arm . 
 it is the princ of wale that threaten thee , 
 who never promiseth but he mean to pay . 
 they fight . dougla flieth . 
 cheerli , my lord . how fare your grace ? 
 sir nichola gawsey hath for succour sent , 
 and so hath clifton . i 'll to clifton straight . 
 king . stay and breath awhil . 
 thou hast redeem 'd thi lost opinion , 
 and show 'd thou mak'st some tender of my life , 
 in thi fair rescu thou hast brought to me . 
 princ . o god ! they did me too much injuri 
 that ever said i heark'n for your death . 
 if it were so , i might have let alon 
 the insult hand of dougla over you , 
 which would have been as speedi in your end 
 as all the poison potion in the world , 
 and sav 'd the treacher labour of your son . 
 king . make up to clifton ; i 'll to sir nichola gawsey . 
 exit . 
 
 enter hotspur . 
 
 hot . if i mistak not , thou art harri monmouth . 
 princ . thou speak'st as if i would deni my name . 
 hot . my name is harri perci . 
 princ . whi , then i see 
 a veri valiant rebel of the name . 
 i am the princ of wale ; and think not , perci , 
 to share with me in glori ani more . 
 two star keep not their motion in one sphere , 
 nor can one england brook a doubl reign 
 of harri perci and the princ of wale . 
 hot . nor shall it , harri ; for the hour is come 
 to end the one of us and would to god 
 thi name in arm were now as great as mine ! 
 princ . i 'll make it greater ere i part from thee , 
 and all the bud honour on thi crest 
 i 'll crop to make a garland for my head . 
 hot . i can no longer brook thi vaniti . 
 they fight . 
 
 enter falstaff . 
 
 fal . well said , hal ! to it , hal ! nay , you shall find no boy 's play 
 here , i can tell you . 
 
 enter dougla . he fighteth with falstaff , who fall down as if 
 he were dead . [ exit dougla . ] the princ killeth perci . 
 
 hot . o harri , thou hast robb 'd me of my youth ! 
 i better brook the loss of brittl life 
 than those proud titl thou hast won of me . 
 they wound my thought wors than thi sword my flesh . 
 but thought the slave , of life , and life time 's fool , 
 and time , that take survey of all the world , 
 must have a stop . o , i could prophesi , 
 but that the earthi and cold hand of death 
 lie on my tongu . no , perci , thou art dust , 
 and food for- [ die . ] 
 princ . for worm , brave perci . fare thee well , great heart ! 
 ill-weav 'd ambit , how much art thou shrunk ! 
 when that thi bodi did contain a spirit , 
 a kingdom for it wa too small a bound ; 
 but now two pace of the vilest earth 
 is room enough . thi earth that bear thee dead 
 bear not aliv so stout a gentleman . 
 if thou wert sensibl of courtesi , 
 i should not make so dear a show of zeal . 
 but let my favour hide thi mangl face ; 
 and , even in thi behalf , i 'll thank myself 
 for do these fair rite of tender . 
 adieu , and take thi prais with thee to heaven ! 
 thi ignomini sleep with thee in the grave , 
 but not rememb'r in thi epitaph ! 
 he spieth falstaff on the ground . 
 what , old acquaint ? could not all thi flesh 
 keep in a littl life ? poor jack , farewel ! 
 i could have better spar 'd a better man . 
 o , i should have a heavi miss of thee 
 if i were much in love with vaniti ! 
 death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day , 
 though mani dearer , in thi bloodi fray . 
 embowel 'd will i see thee by-and-bi ; 
 till then in blood by nobl perci lie . exit . 
 
 falstaff riseth up . 
 
 fal . embowel 'd ? if thou embowel me to-day , i 'll give you leav to 
 powder me and eat me too to-morrow . 'sblood , 't wa time to 
 counterfeit , or that hot termag scot had paid me scot and lot 
 too . counterfeit ? i lie ; i am no counterfeit . to die is to be a 
 counterfeit ; for he is but the counterfeit of a man who hath not 
 the life of a man ; but to counterfeit die when a man therebi 
 liveth , is to be no counterfeit , but the true and perfect imag 
 of life inde . the better part of valour is discret ; in the 
 which better part i have save my life . zound , i am afraid of 
 thi gunpowd perci , though he be dead . how if he should 
 counterfeit too , and rise ? by my faith , i am afraid he would 
 prove the better counterfeit . therefor i 'll make him sure ; yea , 
 and i 'll swear i kill 'd him . whi may not he rise as well as i ? 
 noth confut me but eye , and nobodi see me . therefor , 
 sirrah [ stab him ] , with a new wound in your thigh , come you 
 along with me . 
 
 he take up hotspur on hi hack . [ enter princ , and john of 
 lancast . 
 
 princ . come , brother john ; full brave hast thou flesh 'd 
 thi maiden sword . 
 john . but , soft ! whom have we here ? 
 did you not tell me thi fat man wa dead ? 
 princ . i did ; i saw him dead , 
 breathless and bleed on the ground . art thou aliv , 
 or is it fantasi that play upon our eyesight ? 
 i prithe speak . we will not trust our eye 
 without our ear . thou art not what thou seem'st . 
 fal . no , that 's certain ! i am not a doubl man ; but if i be not 
 jack falstaff , then am i a jack . there 's perci . if your father 
 will do me ani honour , so ; if not , let him kill the next perci 
 himself . i look to be either earl or duke , i can assur you . 
 princ . whi , perci i kill 'd myself , and saw thee dead ! 
 fal . didst thou ? lord , lord , how thi world is given to lie ! i 
 grant you i wa down , and out of breath , and so wa he ; but we 
 rose both at an instant and fought a long hour by shrewsburi 
 clock . if i may be believ 'd , so ; if not , let them that should 
 reward valour bear the sin upon their own head . i 'll take it 
 upon my death , i gave him thi wound in the thigh . if the man 
 were aliv and would deni it , zound ! i would make him eat a 
 piec of my sword . 
 john . thi is the strangest tale that ever i beard . 
 princ . thi is the strangest fellow , brother john . 
 come , bring your luggag nobli on your back . 
 for my part , if a lie may do thee grace , 
 i 'll gild it with the happiest term i have . 
 a retreat is sound . 
 the trumpet sound retreat ; the day is our . 
 come , brother , let 's to the highest of the field , 
 to see what friend are live , who are dead . 
 exeunt [ princ henri and princ john ] . 
 fal . i 'll follow , as they say , for reward . he that reward me , god 
 reward him ! if i do grow great , i 'll grow less ; for i 'll purg , 
 and leav sack , and live cleanli , as a nobleman should do . 
 exit [ bear off the bodi ] . 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 anoth part of the field . 
 
 the trumpet sound . [ enter the king , princ of wale , lord john of lancast , 
 earl of westmoreland , with worcest and vernon prison . 
 
 king . thu ever did rebellion find rebuk . 
 ill-spirit worcest ! did not we send grace , 
 pardon , and term of love to all of you ? 
 and wouldst thou turn our offer contrari ? 
 misus the tenour of thi kinsman 's trust ? 
 three knight upon our parti slain to-day , 
 a nobl earl , and mani a creatur els 
 had been aliv thi hour , 
 if like a christian thou hadst truli born 
 betwixt our armi true intellig . 
 wor . what i have done my safeti urg 'd me to ; 
 and i embrac thi fortun patient , 
 sinc not to be avoid it fail on me . 
 king . bear worcest to the death , and vernon too ; 
 other offend we will paus upon . 
 exeunt worcest and vernon , [ guard ] . 
 how goe the field ? 
 princ . the nobl scot , lord dougla , when he saw 
 the fortun of the day quit turn 'd from him , 
 the nobl perci slain and all hi men 
 upon the foot of fear , fled with the rest ; 
 and fall from a hill , he wa so brui 'd 
 that the pursuer took him . at my tent 
 the dougla is , and i beseech your grace 
 i may dispos of him . 
 king . with all my heart . 
 princ . then brother john of lancast , to you 
 thi honour bounti shall belong . 
 go to the dougla and deliv him 
 up to hi pleasur , ransomless and free . 
 hi valour shown upon our crest today 
 hath taught us how to cherish such high deed , 
 even in the bosom of our adversari . 
 john . i thank your grace for thi high courtesi , 
 which i shall give away immedi . 
 king . then thi remain , that we divid our power . 
 you , son john , and my cousin westmoreland , 
 toward york shall bend you with your dearest speed 
 to meet northumberland and the prelat scroop , 
 who , as we hear , are busili in arm . 
 myself and you , son harri , will toward wale 
 to fight with glendow and the earl of march . 
 rebellion in thi laud shall lose hi sway , 
 meet the check of such anoth day ; 
 and sinc thi busi so fair is done , 
 let us not leav till all our own be won . 
 exeunt . 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 
 second part of king henri iv 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 choru 
 king henri the fifth 
 duke of gloucest , brother to the king 
 duke of bedford , `` `` `` `` 
 duke of exet , uncl to the king 
 duke of york , cousin to the king 
 earl of salisburi 
 earl of westmoreland 
 earl of warwick 
 archbishop of canterburi 
 bishop of eli 
 
 earl of cambridg , conspir against the king 
 lord scroop , `` `` `` `` 
 sir thoma grey , `` `` `` `` 
 sir thoma erpingham , offic in the king 's armi 
 gower , `` `` `` `` `` 
 fluellen , `` `` `` `` `` 
 macmorri , `` `` `` `` `` 
 jami , `` `` `` `` `` 
 
 bate , soldier in the king 's armi 
 court , `` `` `` `` `` 
 william , `` `` `` `` `` 
 nym , `` `` `` `` `` 
 bardolph , `` `` `` `` `` 
 pistol , `` `` `` `` `` 
 
 boy a herald 
 
 charl the sixth , king of franc 
 lewi , the dauphin duke of burgundi 
 duke of orlean duke of britain 
 duke of bourbon the constabl of franc 
 rambur , french lord 
 grandpr , `` `` 
 governor of harfleur montjoy , a french herald 
 ambassador to the king of england 
 
 isabel , queen of franc 
 katherin , daughter to charl and isabel 
 alic , a ladi attend her 
 hostess of the boar 's head , eastcheap ; formerli mrs. quickli , now 
 marri to pistol 
 
 lord , ladi , offic , soldier , messeng , attend 
 
 
 scene : 
 england and franc 
 
 prologu 
 prologu . 
 
 enter choru 
 
 choru . o for a muse of fire , that would ascend 
 the brightest heaven of invent , 
 a kingdom for a stage , princ to act , 
 and monarch to behold the swell scene ! 
 then should the warlik harri , like himself , 
 assum the port of mar ; and at hi heel , 
 leash 'd in like hound , should famin , sword , and fire , 
 crouch for employ . but pardon , gentl all , 
 the flat unrais spirit that hath dar 'd 
 on thi unworthi scaffold to bring forth 
 so great an object . can thi cockpit hold 
 the vasti field of franc ? or may we cram 
 within thi wooden o the veri casqu 
 that did affright the air at agincourt ? 
 o , pardon ! sinc a crook figur may 
 attest in littl place a million ; 
 and let us , cipher to thi great accompt , 
 on your imaginari forc work . 
 suppos within the girdl of these wall 
 are now confin 'd two mighti monarchi , 
 whose high uprear and abut front 
 the peril narrow ocean part asund . 
 piec out our imperfect with your thought : 
 into a thousand part divid one man , 
 and make imaginari puissanc ; 
 think , when we talk of hors , that you see them 
 print their proud hoof i ' th ' receiv earth ; 
 for 't is your thought that now must deck our king , 
 carri them here and there , jump o'er time , 
 turn th ' accomplish of mani year 
 into an hour-glass ; for the which suppli , 
 admit me choru to thi histori ; 
 who prologue-lik , your humbl patienc pray 
 gentli to hear , kindli to judg , our play . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 london . an ante-chamb in the king 's palac 
 
 enter the archbishop of canterburi and the bishop of eli 
 
 canterburi . my lord , i 'll tell you : that self bill is urg 'd 
 which in th ' eleventh year of the last king 's reign 
 wa like , and had inde against us pass 'd 
 but that the scambl and unquiet time 
 did push it out of farther question . 
 eli . but how , my lord , shall we resist it now ? 
 canterburi . it must be thought on . if it pass against us , 
 we lose the better half of our possess ; 
 for all the tempor land which men devout 
 by testament have given to the church 
 would they strip from us ; be valu 'd thus- 
 as much as would maintain , to the king 's honour , 
 full fifteen earl and fifteen hundr knight , 
 six thousand and two hundr good esquir ; 
 and , to relief of lazar and weak age , 
 of indig faint soul , past corpor toil , 
 a hundr alms-hous right well suppli ; 
 and to the coffer of the king , besid , 
 a thousand pound by th ' year : thu run the bill . 
 eli . thi would drink deep . 
 canterburi . 't would drink the cup and all . 
 eli . but what prevent ? 
 canterburi . the king is full of grace and fair regard . 
 eli . and a true lover of the holi church . 
 canterburi . the cours of hi youth promi 'd it not . 
 the breath no sooner left hi father 's bodi 
 but that hi wild , mortifi in him , 
 seem 'd to die too ; yea , at that veri moment , 
 consider like an angel came 
 and whipp 'd th ' offend adam out of him , 
 leav hi bodi as a paradis 
 t'envelop and contain celesti spirit . 
 never wa such a sudden scholar made ; 
 never came reform in a flood , 
 with such a headi curranc , scour fault ; 
 nor never hydra-head wilfuln 
 so soon did lose hi seat , and all at onc , 
 as in thi king . 
 eli . we are bless in the chang . 
 canterburi . hear him but reason in divin , 
 and , all-admir , with an inward wish 
 you would desir the king were made a prelat ; 
 hear him debat of commonwealth affair , 
 you would say it hath been all in all hi studi ; 
 list hi discours of war , and you shall hear 
 a fear battl rend'r you in music . 
 turn him to ani caus of polici , 
 the gordian knot of it he will unloos , 
 familiar as hi garter ; that , when he speak , 
 the air , a charter 'd libertin , is still , 
 and the mute wonder lurketh in men 's ear 
 to steal hi sweet and honey 'd sentenc ; 
 so that the art and practic part of life 
 must be the mistress to thi theoric ; 
 which is a wonder how hi grace should glean it , 
 sinc hi addict wa to cours vain , 
 hi compani unlett 'd , rude , and shallow , 
 hi hour fill 'd up with riot , banquet , sport ; 
 and never note in him ani studi , 
 ani retir , ani sequestr 
 from open haunt and popular . 
 eli . the strawberri grow underneath the nettl , 
 and wholesom berri thrive and ripen best 
 neighbour 'd by fruit of baser qualiti ; 
 and so the princ obscur 'd hi contempl 
 under the veil of wild ; which , no doubt , 
 grew like the summer grass , fastest by night , 
 unseen , yet cresciv in hi faculti . 
 canterburi . it must be so ; for miracl are cea 'd ; 
 and therefor we must need admit the mean 
 how thing are perfect . 
 eli . but , my good lord , 
 how now for mitig of thi bill 
 urg 'd by the common ? doth hi majesti 
 inclin to it , or no ? 
 canterburi . he seem indiffer 
 or rather sway more upon our part 
 than cherish th ' exhibit against us ; 
 for i have made an offer to hi majesty- 
 upon our spiritu convoc 
 and in regard of caus now in hand , 
 which i have open 'd to hi grace at larg , 
 as touch france- to give a greater sum 
 than ever at one time the clergi yet 
 did to hi predecessor part withal . 
 eli . how did thi offer seem receiv 'd , my lord ? 
 canterburi . with good accept of hi majesti ; 
 save that there wa not time enough to hear , 
 as i perceiv 'd hi grace would fain have done , 
 the sever and unhidden passag 
 of hi true tide to some certain dukedom , 
 and gener to the crown and seat of franc , 
 deriv 'd from edward , hi great-grandfath . 
 eli . what wa th ' impedi that broke thi off ? 
 canterburi . the french ambassador upon that instant 
 crav 'd audienc ; and the hour , i think , is come 
 to give him hear : is it four o'clock ? 
 eli . it is . 
 canterburi . then go we in , to know hi embassi ; 
 which i could with a readi guess declar , 
 befor the frenchman speak a word of it . 
 eli . i 'll wait upon you , and i long to hear it . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 london . the presenc chamber in the king 's palac 
 
 enter the king , gloucest , bedford , exet , warwick , westmoreland , 
 and attend 
 
 king henri . where is my graciou lord of canterburi ? 
 exet . not here in presenc . 
 king henri . send for him , good uncl . 
 westmoreland . shall we call in th ' ambassador , my lieg ? 
 king henri . not yet , my cousin ; we would be resolv 'd , 
 befor we hear him , of some thing of weight 
 that task our thought , concern us and franc . 
 
 enter the archbishop of canterburi and 
 the bishop of eli 
 
 canterburi . god and hi angel guard your sacr throne , 
 and make you long becom it ! 
 king henri . sure , we thank you . 
 my learn lord , we pray you to proceed , 
 and justli and religi unfold 
 whi the law saliqu , that they have in franc , 
 or should or should not bar us in our claim ; 
 and god forbid , my dear and faith lord , 
 that you should fashion , wrest , or bow your read , 
 or nice charg your understand soul 
 with open titl miscreat whose right 
 suit not in nativ colour with the truth ; 
 for god doth know how mani , now in health , 
 shall drop their blood in approb 
 of what your rever shall incit us to . 
 therefor take heed how you impawn our person , 
 how you awak our sleep sword of war- 
 we charg you , in the name of god , take heed ; 
 for never two such kingdom did contend 
 without much fall of blood ; whose guiltless drop 
 are everi one a woe , a sore complaint , 
 'gainst him whose wrong give edg unto the sword 
 that make such wast in brief mortal . 
 under thi conjur speak , my lord ; 
 for we will hear , note , and believ in heart , 
 that what you speak is in your conscienc wash 'd 
 as pure as sin with baptism . 
 canterburi . then hear me , graciou sovereign , and you peer , 
 that owe yourselv , your live , and servic , 
 to thi imperi throne . there is no bar 
 to make against your high ' claim to franc 
 but thi , which they produc from pharamond : 
 'in terram salicam mulier ne succedant'- 
 'no woman shall succeed in saliqu land ' ; 
 which saliqu land the french unjustli gloze 
 to be the realm of franc , and pharamond 
 the founder of thi law and femal bar . 
 yet their own author faith affirm 
 that the land saliqu is in germani , 
 between the flood of sala and of elb ; 
 where charl the great , have subdu 'd the saxon , 
 there left behind and settl certain french ; 
 who , hold in disdain the german women 
 for some dishonest manner of their life , 
 establish 'd then thi law : to wit , no femal 
 should be inheritrix in saliqu land ; 
 which saliqu , as i said , 'twixt elb and sala , 
 is at thi day in germani call 'd meisen . 
 then doth it well appear the saliqu law 
 wa not devis for the realm of franc ; 
 nor did the french possess the saliqu land 
 until four hundr one and twenti year 
 after defunct of king pharamond , 
 idli suppo 'd the founder of thi law ; 
 who die within the year of our redempt 
 four hundr twenty-six ; and charl the great 
 subdu 'd the saxon , and did seat the french 
 beyond the river sala , in the year 
 eight hundr five . besid , their writer say , 
 king pepin , which depos childer , 
 did , as heir gener , be descend 
 of blithild , which wa daughter to king clothair , 
 make claim and titl to the crown of franc . 
 hugh capet also , who usurp 'd the crown 
 of charl the duke of lorrain , sole heir male 
 of the true line and stock of charl the great , 
 to find hi titl with some show of truth- 
 though in pure truth it wa corrupt and naught- 
 convey 'd himself as th ' heir to th ' ladi lingar , 
 daughter to charlemain , who wa the son 
 to lewi the emperor , and lewi the son 
 of charl the great . also king lewi the tenth , 
 who wa sole heir to the usurp capet , 
 could not keep quiet in hi conscienc , 
 wear the crown of franc , till satisfi 
 that fair queen isabel , hi grandmoth , 
 wa lineal of the ladi ermengar , 
 daughter to charl the foresaid duke of lorrain ; 
 by the which marriag the line of charl the great 
 wa re-unit to the crown of franc . 
 so that , as clear as is the summer 's sun , 
 king pepin 's titl , and hugh capet 's claim , 
 king lewi hi satisfact , all appear 
 to hold in right and tide of the femal ; 
 so do the king of franc unto thi day , 
 howbeit they would hold up thi saliqu law 
 to bar your high claim from the femal ; 
 and rather choos to hide them in a net 
 than ampli to imbar their crook tide 
 usurp 'd from you and your progenitor . 
 king henri . may i with right and conscienc make thi claim ? 
 canterburi . the sin upon my head , dread sovereign ! 
 for in the book of number is it writ , 
 when the man die , let the inherit 
 descend unto the daughter . graciou lord , 
 stand for your own , unwind your bloodi flag , 
 look back into your mighti ancestor . 
 go , my dread lord , to your great-grandsir 's tomb , 
 from whom you claim ; invok hi warlik spirit , 
 and your great-uncl 's , edward the black princ , 
 who on the french ground play 'd a tragedi , 
 make defeat on the fun power of franc , 
 while hi most mighti father on a hill 
 stood smile to behold hi lion 's whelp 
 forag in blood of french nobil . 
 o nobl english , that could entertain 
 with half their forc the full pride of franc , 
 and let anoth half stand laugh by , 
 all out of work and cold for action ! 
 eli . awak remembr of these valiant dead , 
 and with your puissant arm renew their feat . 
 you are their heir ; you sit upon their throne ; 
 the blood and courag that renown them 
 run in your vein ; and my thrice-puiss lieg 
 is in the veri may-morn of hi youth , 
 ripe for exploit and mighti enterpris . 
 exet . your brother king and monarch of the earth 
 do all expect that you should rous yourself , 
 as did the former lion of your blood . 
 westmoreland . they know your grace hath caus and mean and might- 
 so hath your high ; never king of england 
 had nobl richer and more loyal subject , 
 whose heart have left their bodi here in england 
 and lie pavilion 'd in the field of franc . 
 canterburi . o , let their bodi follow , my dear lieg , 
 with blood and sword and fire to win your right ! 
 in aid whereof we of the spiritualti 
 will rais your high such a mighti sum 
 as never did the clergi at one time 
 bring in to ani of your ancestor . 
 king henri . we must not onli arm t ' invad the french , 
 but lay down our proport to defend 
 against the scot , who will make road upon us 
 with all advantag . 
 canterburi . they of those march , graciou sovereign , 
 shall be a wall suffici to defend 
 our inland from the pilfer border . 
 king henri . we do not mean the cours snatcher onli , 
 but fear the main intend of the scot , 
 who hath been still a giddi neighbour to us ; 
 for you shall read that my great-grandfath 
 never went with hi forc into franc 
 but that the scot on hi unfurnish 'd kingdom 
 came pour , like the tide into a breach , 
 with ampl and brim ful of hi forc , 
 gall the glean land with hot assay , 
 girdl with grievou sieg castl and town ; 
 that england , be empti of defenc , 
 hath shook and trembl at th ' ill neighbourhood . 
 canterburi . she hath been then more fear 'd than harm 'd , my lieg ; 
 for hear her but exampl by herself : 
 when all her chivalri hath been in franc , 
 and she a mourn widow of her nobl , 
 she hath herself not onli well defend 
 but taken and impound as a stray 
 the king of scot ; whom she did send to franc , 
 to fill king edward 's fame with prison king , 
 and make her chronicl as rich with prais 
 as is the ooz and bottom of the sea 
 with sunken wreck and sumless treasuri . 
 westmoreland . but there 's a say , veri old and true : 
 
 'if that you will franc win , 
 then with scotland first begin . ' 
 
 for onc the eagl england be in prey , 
 to her unguard nest the weasel scot 
 come sneak , and so suck her princ egg , 
 play the mous in absenc of the cat , 
 to tear and havoc more than she can eat . 
 exet . it follow , then , the cat must stay at home ; 
 yet that is but a crush 'd necess , 
 sinc we have lock to safeguard necessari 
 and pretti trap to catch the petti thiev . 
 while that the arm hand doth fight abroad , 
 th ' advis head defend itself at home ; 
 for govern , though high , and low , and lower , 
 put into part , doth keep in one consent , 
 congre in a full and natur close , 
 like music . 
 canterburi . therefor doth heaven divid 
 the state of man in diver function , 
 set endeavour in continu motion ; 
 to which is fix as an aim or but 
 obedi ; for so work the honey bee , 
 creatur that by a rule in natur teach 
 the act of order to a peopl kingdom . 
 they have a king , and offic of sort , 
 where some like magistr correct at home ; 
 other like merchant ventur trade abroad ; 
 other like soldier , arm in their sting , 
 make boot upon the summer 's velvet bud , 
 which pillag they with merri march bring home 
 to the tent-roy of their emperor ; 
 who , busi in hi majesti , survey 
 the sing mason build roof of gold , 
 the civil citizen knead up the honey , 
 the poor mechan porter crowd in 
 their heavi burden at hi narrow gate , 
 the sad-ey 'd justic , with hi surli hum , 
 deliv o'er to executor pale 
 the lazi yawn drone . i thi infer , 
 that mani thing , have full refer 
 to one consent , may work contrari ; 
 as mani arrow loos sever way 
 come to one mark , as mani way meet in one town , 
 as mani fresh stream meet in one salt sea , 
 as mani line close in the dial 's centr ; 
 so mani a thousand action , onc afoot , 
 end in one purpos , and be all well home 
 without defeat . therefor to franc , my lieg . 
 divid your happi england into four ; 
 whereof take you one quarter into franc , 
 and you withal shall make all gallia shake . 
 if we , with thrice such power left at home , 
 can not defend our own door from the dog , 
 let us be worri , and our nation lose 
 the name of hardi and polici . 
 king henri . call in the messeng sent from the dauphin . 
 exeunt some attend 
 now are we well resolv 'd ; and , by god 's help 
 and your , the nobl sinew of our power , 
 franc be our , we 'll bend it to our awe , 
 or break it all to piec ; or there we 'll sit , 
 rule in larg and ampl emperi 
 o'er franc and all her almost kingli dukedom , 
 or lay these bone in an unworthi urn , 
 tombless , with no remembr over them . 
 either our histori shall with full mouth 
 speak freeli of our act , or els our grave , 
 like turkish mute , shall have a tongueless mouth , 
 not worshipp 'd with a waxen epitaph . 
 
 enter ambassador of franc 
 
 now are we well prepar 'd to know the pleasur 
 of our fair cousin dauphin ; for we hear 
 your greet is from him , not from the king . 
 ambassador . may't pleas your majesti to give us leav 
 freeli to render what we have in charg ; 
 or shall we sparingli show you far of 
 the dauphin 's mean and our embassi ? 
 king henri . we are no tyrant , but a christian king , 
 unto whose grace our passion is as subject 
 as are our wretch fett'r in our prison ; 
 therefor with frank and with uncurb plain 
 tell us the dauphin 's mind . 
 ambassador . thu then , in few . 
 your high , late send into franc , 
 did claim some certain dukedom in the right 
 of your great predecessor , king edward the third . 
 in answer of which claim , the princ our master 
 say that you savour too much of your youth , 
 and bid you be advi 'd there 's nought in franc 
 that can be with a nimbl galliard won ; 
 you can not revel into dukedom there . 
 he therefor send you , meeter for your spirit , 
 thi tun of treasur ; and , in lieu of thi , 
 desir you let the dukedom that you claim 
 hear no more of you . thi the dauphin speak . 
 king henri . what treasur , uncl ? 
 exet . tennis-bal , my lieg . 
 king henri . we are glad the dauphin is so pleasant with us ; 
 hi present and your pain we thank you for . 
 when we have match 'd our racket to these ball , 
 we will in franc , by god 's grace , play a set 
 shall strike hi father 's crown into the hazard . 
 tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler 
 that all the court of franc will be disturb 'd 
 with chace . and we understand him well , 
 how he come o'er us with our wilder day , 
 not measur what use we made of them . 
 we never valu 'd thi poor seat of england ; 
 and therefor , live henc , did give ourself 
 to barbar licenc ; as 't is ever common 
 that men are merriest when they are from home . 
 but tell the dauphin i will keep my state , 
 be like a king , and show my sail of great , 
 when i do rous me in my throne of franc ; 
 for that i have laid by my majesti 
 and plod like a man for working-day ; 
 but i will rise there with so full a glori 
 that i will dazzl all the eye of franc , 
 yea , strike the dauphin blind to look on us . 
 and tell the pleasant princ thi mock of hi 
 hath turn 'd hi ball to gun-ston , and hi soul 
 shall stand sore charg for the wast vengeanc 
 that shall fli with them ; for mani a thousand widow 
 shall thi hi mock mock of their dear husband ; 
 mock mother from their son , mock castl down ; 
 and some are yet ungotten and unborn 
 that shall have caus to curs the dauphin 's scorn . 
 but thi lie all within the will of god , 
 to whom i do appeal ; and in whose name , 
 tell you the dauphin , i am come on , 
 to veng me as i may and to put forth 
 my right hand in a well-hallow 'd caus . 
 so get you henc in peac ; and tell the dauphin 
 hi jest will savour but of shallow wit , 
 when thousand weep more than did laugh at it . 
 convey them with safe conduct . fare you well . 
 exeunt ambassador 
 exet . thi wa a merri messag . 
 king henri . we hope to make the sender blush at it . 
 therefor , my lord , omit no happi hour 
 that may give furth'ranc to our expedit ; 
 for we have now no thought in us but franc , 
 save those to god , that run befor our busi . 
 therefor let our proport for these war 
 be soon collect , and all thing thought upon 
 that may with reason swift ad 
 more feather to our wing ; for , god befor , 
 we 'll chide thi dauphin at hi father 's door . 
 therefor let everi man now task hi thought 
 that thi fair action may on foot be brought . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . prologu . 
 
 flourish . enter choru 
 
 choru . now all the youth of england are on fire , 
 and silken dallianc in the wardrob lie ; 
 now thrive the armour , and honour 's thought 
 reign sole in the breast of everi man ; 
 they sell the pastur now to buy the hors , 
 follow the mirror of all christian king 
 with wing heel , as english mercuri . 
 for now sit expect in the air , 
 and hide a sword from hilt unto the point 
 with crown imperi , crown , and coronet , 
 promi 'd to harri and hi follow . 
 the french , advi 'd by good intellig 
 of thi most dread prepar , 
 shake in their fear and with pale polici 
 seek to divert the english purpos . 
 o england ! model to thi inward great , 
 like littl bodi with a mighti heart , 
 what mightst thou do that honour would thee do , 
 were all thi children kind and natur ! 
 but see thi fault ! franc hath in thee found out 
 a nest of hollow bosom , which he fill 
 with treacher crown ; and three corrupt men- 
 one , richard earl of cambridg , and the second , 
 henri lord scroop of masham , and the third , 
 sir thoma grey , knight , of northumberland , 
 have , for the gilt of france- o guilt inde ! - 
 confirm 'd conspiraci with fear franc ; 
 and by their hand thi grace of king must die- 
 if hell and treason hold their promis , 
 ere he take ship for france- and in southampton . 
 linger your patienc on , and we 'll digest 
 th ' abus of distanc , forc a play . 
 the sum is paid , the traitor are agre , 
 the king is set from london , and the scene 
 is now transport , gentl , to southampton ; 
 there is the play-hous now , there must you sit , 
 and thenc to franc shall we convey you safe 
 and bring you back , charm the narrow sea 
 to give you gentl pass ; for , if we may , 
 we 'll not offend one stomach with our play . 
 but , till the king come forth , and not till then , 
 unto southampton do we shift our scene . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene i . 
 london . befor the boar 's head tavern , eastcheap 
 
 enter corpor nym and lieuten bardolph 
 
 bardolph . well met , corpor nym . 
 nym . good morrow , lieuten bardolph . 
 bardolph . what , are ancient pistol and you friend yet ? 
 nym . for my part , i care not ; i say littl , but when time shall 
 serv , there shall be smiles- but that shall be as it may . i dare 
 not fight ; but i will wink and hold out mine iron . it is a simpl 
 one ; but what though ? it will toast chees , and it will endur 
 cold as anoth man 's sword will ; and there 's an end . 
 bardolph . i will bestow a breakfast to make you friend ; and we 'll 
 be all three sworn brother to franc . let't be so , good corpor 
 nym . 
 nym . faith , i will live so long as i may , that 's the certain of it ; 
 and when i can not live ani longer , i will do as i may . that is my 
 rest , that is the rendezv of it . 
 bardolph . it is certain , corpor , that he is marri to nell 
 quickli ; and certainli she did you wrong , for you were 
 troth-plight to her . 
 nym . i can not tell ; thing must be as they may . men may sleep , and 
 they may have their throat about them at that time ; and some say 
 knive have edg . it must be as it may ; though patienc be a 
 tire mare , yet she will plod . there must be conclus . well , i 
 can not tell . 
 
 enter pistol and hostess 
 
 bardolph . here come ancient pistol and hi wife . good corpor , be 
 patient here . 
 nym . how now , mine host pistol ! 
 pistol . base tike , call'st thou me host ? 
 now by thi hand , i swear i scorn the term ; 
 nor shall my nell keep lodger . 
 hostess . no , by my troth , not long ; for we can not lodg and board a 
 dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestli by the prick of 
 their needl , but it will be thought we keep a bawdy-hous 
 straight . [ nym draw ] o well-a-day , ladi , if he be not drawn ! now 
 we shall see wil adulteri and murder commit . 
 bardolph . good lieuten , good corpor , offer noth here . 
 nym . pish ! 
 pistol . pish for thee , iceland dog ! thou prick-ear 'd cur of 
 iceland ! 
 hostess . good corpor nym , show thi valour , and put up your sword . 
 nym . will you shog off ? i would have you solu . 
 pistol . 'solu , ' egregi dog ? o viper vile ! 
 the 'solu ' in thi most mervail face ; 
 the 'solu ' in thi teeth , and in thi throat , 
 and in thi hate lung , yea , in thi maw , perdi ; 
 and , which is wors , within thi nasti mouth ! 
 i do retort the 'solu ' in thi bowel ; 
 for i can take , and pistol 's cock is up , 
 and flash fire will follow . 
 nym . i am not barbason : you can not conjur me . i have an humour to 
 knock you indiffer well . if you grow foul with me , pistol , i 
 will scour you with my rapier , as i may , in fair term ; if you 
 would walk off i would prick your gut a littl , in good term , 
 as i may , and thae the humour of it . 
 pistol . o braggart vile and damn furiou wight ! 
 the grave doth gape and dote death is near ; 
 therefor exhal . [ pistol draw ] 
 bardolph . hear me , hear me what i say : he that strike the first 
 stroke i 'll run him up to the hilt , as i am a soldier . 
 [ draw ] 
 pistol . an oath of mickl might ; and furi shall abat . 
 [ pistol and nym sheath their sword ] 
 give me thi fist , thi fore-foot to me give ; 
 thi spirit are most tall . 
 nym . i will cut thi throat one time or other , in fair term ; that 
 is the humour of it . 
 pistol . 'coupl a gorg ! ' 
 that is the word . i thee defi again . 
 o hound of crete , think'st thou my spous to get ? 
 no ; to the spital go , 
 and from the powd'r tub of infami 
 fetch forth the lazar kite of cressid 's kind , 
 doll tearsheet she by name , and her espous . 
 i have , and i will hold , the quondam quickli 
 for the onli she ; and- pauca , there 's enough . 
 go to . 
 
 enter the boy 
 
 boy . mine host pistol , you must come to my master ; and your 
 hostess- he is veri sick , and would to bed . good bardolph , put 
 thi face between hi sheet , and do the offic of a warming-pan . 
 faith , he 's veri ill. 
 bardolph . away , you rogu . 
 hostess . by my troth , he 'll yield the crow a pud one of these 
 day : the king ha kill 'd hi heart . good husband , come home 
 present . exeunt hostess and boy 
 bardolph . come , shall i make you two friend ? we must to franc 
 togeth ; whi the devil should we keep knive to cut one 
 anoth 's throat ? 
 pistol . let flood o'erswel , and fiend for food howl on ! 
 nym . you 'll pay me the eight shill i won of you at bet ? 
 pistol . base is the slave that pay . 
 nym . that now i will have ; that 's the humour of it . 
 pistol . as manhood shall compound : push home . 
 [ pistol and nym draw ] 
 bardolph . by thi sword , he that make the first thrust i 'll kill 
 him ; by thi sword , i will . 
 pistol . sword is an oath , and oath must have their cours . 
 [ sheath hi sword ] 
 bardolph . corpor nym , an thou wilt be friend , be friend ; an 
 thou wilt not , whi then be enemi with me too . prithe put up . 
 nym . i shall have my eight shill i won of you at bet ? 
 pistol . a nobl shalt thou have , and present pay ; 
 and liquor likewis will i give to thee , 
 and friendship shall combin , and brotherhood . 
 i 'll live by nym and nym shall live by me . 
 is not thi just ? for i shall sutler be 
 unto the camp , and profit will accru . 
 give me thi hand . 
 nym . [ sheath hi sword ] i shall have my nobl ? 
 pistol . in cash most justli paid . 
 nym . [ shake hand ] well , then , that 's the humour of't . 
 
 re-ent hostess 
 
 hostess . as ever you come of women , come in quickli to sir john . 
 ah , poor heart ! he is so shak 'd of a burn quotidian tertian 
 that it is most lament to behold . sweet men , come to him . 
 nym . the king hath run bad humour on the knight ; that 's the even 
 of it . 
 pistol . nym , thou hast spoke the right ; 
 hi heart is fract and corrobor . 
 nym . the king is a good king , but it must be as it may ; he pass 
 some humour and career . 
 pistol . let us condol the knight ; for , lambkin , we will live . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 southampton . a council-chamb 
 
 enter exet , bedford , and westmoreland 
 
 bedford . fore god , hi grace is bold , to trust these traitor . 
 exet . they shall be apprehend by and by . 
 westmoreland . how smooth and even they do bear themselv , 
 as if allegi in their bosom sat , 
 crown with faith and constant loyalti ! 
 bedford . the king hath note of all that they intend , 
 by intercept which they dream not of . 
 exet . nay , but the man that wa hi bedfellow , 
 whom he hath dull 'd and cloy 'd with graciou favours- 
 that he should , for a foreign purs , so sell 
 hi sovereign 's life to death and treacheri ! 
 
 trumpet sound . enter the king , scroop , 
 cambridg , grey , and attend 
 
 king henri . now sit the wind fair , and we will aboard . 
 my lord of cambridg , and my kind lord of masham , 
 and you , my gentl knight , give me your thought . 
 think you not that the pow'r we bear with us 
 will cut their passag through the forc of franc , 
 do the execut and the act 
 for which we have in head assembl them ? 
 scroop . no doubt , my lieg , if each man do hi best . 
 king henri . i doubt not that , sinc we are well persuad 
 we carri not a heart with us from henc 
 that grow not in a fair consent with our ; 
 nor leav not one behind that doth not wish 
 success and conquest to attend on us . 
 cambridg . never wa monarch better fear 'd and lov 'd 
 than is your majesti . there 's not , i think , a subject 
 that sit in heart-grief and uneasin 
 under the sweet shade of your govern . 
 grey . true : those that were your father 's enemi 
 have steep 'd their gall in honey , and do serv you 
 with heart creat of duti and of zeal . 
 king henri . we therefor have great caus of thank , 
 and shall forget the offic of our hand 
 sooner than quittanc of desert and merit 
 accord to the weight and worthi . 
 scroop . so servic shall with steel sinew toil , 
 and labour shall refresh itself with hope , 
 to do your grace incess servic . 
 king henri . we judg no less . uncl of exet , 
 enlarg the man commit yesterday 
 that rail 'd against our person . we consid 
 it wa excess of wine that set him on ; 
 and on hi more advic we pardon him . 
 scroop . that 's merci , but too much secur . 
 let him be punish 'd , sovereign , lest exampl 
 breed , by hi suffer , more of such a kind . 
 king henri . o , let us yet be merci ! 
 cambridg . so may your high , and yet punish too . 
 grey . sir , 
 you show great merci if you give him life , 
 after the tast of much correct . 
 king henri . ala , your too much love and care of me 
 are heavi orison 'gainst thi poor wretch ! 
 if littl fault proceed on distemp 
 shall not be wink 'd at , how shall we stretch our eye 
 when capit crime , chew 'd , swallow 'd , and digest , 
 appear befor us ? we 'll yet enlarg that man , 
 though cambridg , scroop , and grey , in their dear care 
 and tender preserv of our person , 
 would have him punish 'd . and now to our french caus : 
 who are the late commission ? 
 cambridg . i one , my lord . 
 your high bade me ask for it to-day . 
 scroop . so did you me , my lieg . 
 grey . and i , my royal sovereign . 
 king henri . then , richard earl of cambridg , there is your ; 
 there your , lord scroop of masham ; and , sir knight , 
 grey of northumberland , thi same is your . 
 read them , and know i know your worthi . 
 my lord of westmoreland , and uncl exet , 
 we will aboard to-night . whi , how now , gentlemen ? 
 what see you in those paper , that you lose 
 so much complexion ? look ye how they chang ! 
 their cheek are paper . whi , what read you there 
 that have so coward and cha 'd your blood 
 out of appear ? 
 cambridg . i do confess my fault , 
 and do submit me to your high ' merci . 
 grey , scroop . to which we all appeal . 
 king henri . the merci that wa quick in us but late 
 by your own counsel is suppress 'd and kill 'd . 
 you must not dare , for shame , to talk of merci ; 
 for your own reason turn into your bosom 
 as dog upon their master , worri you . 
 see you , my princ and my nobl peer , 
 these english monster ! my lord of cambridg here- 
 you know how apt our love wa to accord 
 to furnish him with an appertin 
 belong to hi honour ; and thi man 
 hath , for a few light crown , lightli conspir 'd , 
 and sworn unto the practic of franc 
 to kill us here in hampton ; to the which 
 thi knight , no less for bounti bound to us 
 than cambridg is , hath likewis sworn . but , o , 
 what shall i say to thee , lord scroop , thou cruel , 
 ingrat , savag , and inhuman creatur ? 
 thou that didst bear the key of all my counsel , 
 that knew'st the veri bottom of my soul , 
 that almost mightst have coin 'd me into gold , 
 wouldst thou have practi 'd on me for thi use- 
 may it be possibl that foreign hire 
 could out of thee extract one spark of evil 
 that might annoy my finger ? 't is so strang 
 that , though the truth of it stand off as gross 
 as black and white , my eye will scarc see it . 
 treason and murder ever kept togeth , 
 as two yoke-devil sworn to either 's purpos , 
 work so grossli in a natur caus 
 that admir did not whoop at them ; 
 but thou , 'gainst all proport , didst bring in 
 wonder to wait on treason and on murder ; 
 and whatsoev cun fiend it wa 
 that wrought upon thee so preposter 
 hath got the voic in hell for excel ; 
 and other devil that suggest by treason 
 do botch and bungl up damnat 
 with patch , colour , and with form , be fetch 'd 
 from glist'r semblanc of pieti ; 
 but he that temper 'd thee bade thee stand up , 
 gave thee no instanc whi thou shouldst do treason , 
 unless to dub thee with the name of traitor . 
 if that same demon that hath gull 'd thee thu 
 should with hi lion gait walk the whole world , 
 he might return to vasti tartar back , 
 and tell the legion ' i can never win 
 a soul so easi as that englishman 's . ' 
 o , how hast thou with jealousi infect 
 the sweet of affianc ! show men duti ? 
 whi , so didst thou . seem they grave and learn ? 
 whi , so didst thou . come they of nobl famili ? 
 whi , so didst thou . seem they religi ? 
 whi , so didst thou . or are they spare in diet , 
 free from gross passion or of mirth or anger , 
 constant in spirit , not swerv with the blood , 
 garnish 'd and deck 'd in modest complement , 
 not work with the eye without the ear , 
 and but in purg judgment trust neither ? 
 such and so fine bolt didst thou seem ; 
 and thu thi fall hath left a kind of blot 
 to mark the full-fraught man and best indu 
 with some suspicion . i will weep for thee ; 
 for thi revolt of thine , methink , is like 
 anoth fall of man . their fault are open . 
 arrest them to the answer of the law ; 
 and god acquit them of their practic ! 
 exet . i arrest thee of high treason , by the name of richard earl 
 of cambridg . 
 i arrest thee of high treason , by the name of henri lord scroop 
 of masham . 
 i arrest thee of high treason , by the name of thoma grey , 
 knight , of northumberland . 
 scroop . our purpos god justli hath discov 'd , 
 and i repent my fault more than my death ; 
 which i beseech your high to forgiv , 
 although my bodi pay the price of it . 
 cambridg . for me , the gold of franc did not seduc , 
 although i did admit it as a motiv 
 the sooner to effect what i intend ; 
 but god be thank for prevent , 
 which i in suffer heartili will rejoic , 
 beseech god and you to pardon me . 
 grey . never did faith subject more rejoic 
 at the discoveri of most danger treason 
 than i do at thi hour joy o'er myself , 
 prevent from a damn enterpris . 
 my fault , but not my bodi , pardon , sovereign . 
 king henri . god quit you in hi merci ! hear your sentenc . 
 you have conspir 'd against our royal person , 
 join 'd with an enemi proclaim 'd , and from hi coffer 
 receiv 'd the golden earnest of our death ; 
 wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter , 
 hi princ and hi peer to servitud , 
 hi subject to oppress and contempt , 
 and hi whole kingdom into desol . 
 touch our person seek we no reveng ; 
 but we our kingdom 's safeti must so tender , 
 whose ruin you have sought , that to her law 
 we do deliv you . get you therefor henc , 
 poor miser wretch , to your death ; 
 the tast whereof god of hi merci give 
 you patienc to endur , and true repent 
 of all your dear offenc . bear them henc . 
 exeunt cambridg , scroop , and grey , guard 
 now , lord , for franc ; the enterpris whereof 
 shall be to you as us like gloriou . 
 we doubt not of a fair and lucki war , 
 sinc god so gracious hath brought to light 
 thi danger treason , lurk in our way 
 to hinder our begin ; we doubt not now 
 but everi rub is smooth on our way . 
 then , forth , dear countrymen ; let us deliv 
 our puissanc into the hand of god , 
 put it straight in expedit . 
 cheerli to sea ; the sign of war advanc ; 
 no king of england , if not king of franc ! 
 flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 eastcheap . befor the boar 's head tavern 
 
 enter pistol , hostess , nym , bardolph , and boy 
 
 hostess . prithe , honey-sweet husband , let me bring thee to 
 stain . 
 pistol . no ; for my manli heart doth earn . 
 bardolph , be blith ; nym , rous thi vaunt vein ; 
 boy , bristl thi courag up . for falstaff he is dead , 
 and we must earn therefor . 
 bardolph . would i were with him , wheresome' he is , either in 
 heaven or in hell ! 
 hostess . nay , sure , he 's not in hell : he 's in arthur 's bosom , if 
 ever man went to arthur 's bosom . ' a made a finer end , and went 
 away an it had been ani christom child ; ' a part ev'n just 
 between twelv and one , ev'n at the turn o ' th ' tide ; for 
 after i saw him fumbl with the sheet , and play with flower , 
 and smile upon hi finger ' end , i knew there wa but one way ; 
 for hi nose wa as sharp as a pen , and ' a babbl 'd of green 
 field . 'how now , sir john ! ' quoth i 'what , man , be o ' good 
 cheer . ' so ' a cri out 'god , god , god ! ' three or four time . now 
 i , to comfort him , bid him ' a should not think of god ; i hop 'd 
 there wa no need to troubl himself with ani such thought yet . 
 so ' a bade me lay more cloth on hi feet ; i put my hand into 
 the bed and felt them , and they were as cold as ani stone ; then i 
 felt to hi knee , and so upward and upward , and all wa as cold 
 as ani stone . 
 nym . they say he cri out of sack . 
 hostess . ay , that ' a did . 
 bardolph . and of women . 
 hostess . nay , that ' a did not . 
 boy . ye , that ' a did , and said they were devil incarn . 
 hostess . ' a could never abid carnat ; 't wa a colour he never 
 like . 
 boy . ' a said onc the devil would have him about women . 
 hostess . ' a did in some sort , inde , handl women ; but then he wa 
 rheumat , and talk 'd of the whore of babylon . 
 boy . do you not rememb ' a saw a flea stick upon bardolph 's nose , 
 and ' a said it wa a black soul burn in hell ? 
 bardolph . well , the fuel is gone that maintain 'd that fire : that 's 
 all the rich i got in hi servic . 
 nym . shall we shog ? the king will be gone from southampton . 
 pistol . come , let 's away . my love , give me thi lip . 
 look to my chattl and my moveabl ; 
 let sens rule . the word is 'pitch and pay . ' 
 trust none ; 
 for oath are straw , men 's faith are wafer-cak , 
 and holdfast is the onli dog , my duck . 
 therefor , caveto be thi counsellor . 
 go , clear thi crystal . yoke-fellow in arm , 
 let us to franc , like horse-leech , my boy , 
 to suck , to suck , the veri blood to suck . 
 boy . and that 's but unwholesom food , they say . 
 pistol . touch her soft mouth and march . 
 bardolph . farewel , hostess . [ kiss her ] 
 nym . i can not kiss , that is the humour of it ; but adieu . 
 pistol . let housewiferi appear ; keep close , i thee command . 
 hostess . farewel ; adieu . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 franc . the king 's palac 
 
 flourish . enter the french king , the dauphin , the duke of berri 
 and britain , the constabl , and other 
 
 french king . thu come the english with full power upon us ; 
 and more than care it us concern 
 to answer royal in our defenc . 
 therefor the duke of berri and of britain , 
 of brabant and of orlean , shall make forth , 
 and you , princ dauphin , with all swift dispatch , 
 to line and new repair our town of war 
 with men of courag and with mean defend ; 
 for england hi approach make as fierc 
 as water to the suck of a gulf . 
 it fit us , then , to be as provid 
 as fear may teach us , out of late exampl 
 left by the fatal and neglect english 
 upon our field . 
 dauphin . my most redoubt father , 
 it is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe ; 
 for peac itself should not so dull a kingdom , 
 though war nor no known quarrel were in question , 
 but that defenc , muster , prepar , 
 should be maintain 'd , assembl , and collect , 
 as were a war in expect . 
 therefor , i say , 't is meet we all go forth 
 to view the sick and feebl part of franc ; 
 and let us do it with no show of fear- 
 no , with no more than if we heard that england 
 were busi with a whitsun morris-d ; 
 for , my good lieg , she is so idli king 'd , 
 her sceptr so fantast born 
 by a vain , giddi , shallow , humor youth , 
 that fear attend her not . 
 constabl . o peac , princ dauphin ! 
 you are too much mistaken in thi king . 
 question your grace the late ambassador 
 with what great state he heard their embassi , 
 how well suppli with nobl counsellor , 
 how modest in except , and withal 
 how terribl in constant resolut , 
 and you shall find hi vaniti foresp 
 were but the outsid of the roman brutu , 
 cover discret with a coat of folli ; 
 as garden do with ordur hide those root 
 that shall first spring and be most delic . 
 dauphin . well , 't is not so , my lord high constabl ; 
 but though we think it so , it is no matter . 
 in case of defenc 't is best to weigh 
 the enemi more mighti than he seem ; 
 so the proport of defenc are fill 'd ; 
 which of a weak and niggardli project 
 doth like a miser spoil hi coat with scant 
 a littl cloth . 
 french king . think we king harri strong ; 
 and , princ , look you strongli arm to meet him . 
 the kindr of him hath been flesh 'd upon us ; 
 and he is bred out of that bloodi strain 
 that haunt us in our familiar path . 
 wit our too much memor shame 
 when cressi battl fatal wa struck , 
 and all our princ capdv 'd by the hand 
 of that black name , edward , black princ of wale ; 
 while that hi mountain sire- on mountain stand , 
 up in the air , crown 'd with the golden sun- 
 saw hi heroic seed , and smil 'd to see him , 
 mangl the work of natur , and defac 
 the pattern that by god and by french father 
 had twenti year been made . thi is a stern 
 of that victori stock ; and let us fear 
 the nativ mighti and fate of him . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . ambassador from harri king of england 
 do crave admitt to your majesti . 
 french king . we 'll give them present audienc . go and bring them . 
 exeunt messeng and certain lord 
 you see thi chase is hotli follow , friend . 
 dauphin . turn head and stop pursuit ; for coward dog 
 most spend their mouth when what they seem to threaten 
 run far befor them . good my sovereign , 
 take up the english short , and let them know 
 of what a monarchi you are the head . 
 self-lov , my lieg , is not so vile a sin 
 as self-neglect . 
 
 re-ent lord , with exet and train 
 
 french king . from our brother of england ? 
 exet . from him , and thu he greet your majesti : 
 he will you , in the name of god almighti , 
 that you divest yourself , and lay apart 
 the borrow glori that by gift of heaven , 
 by law of natur and of nation , 'long 
 to him and to hi heirs- name , the crown , 
 and all wide-stretch honour that pertain , 
 by custom and the ordin of time , 
 unto the crown of franc . that you may know 
 't is no sinist nor no awkward claim , 
 pick 'd from the worm-hol of long-vanish 'd day , 
 nor from the dust of old oblivion rak 'd , 
 he send you thi most memor line , [ give a paper ] 
 in everi branch truli demonstr ; 
 will you overlook thi pedigre . 
 and when you find him evenli deriv 'd 
 from hi most fam 'd of famou ancestor , 
 edward the third , he bid you then resign 
 your crown and kingdom , indirectli held 
 from him , the nativ and true challeng . 
 french king . or els what follow ? 
 exet . bloodi constraint ; for if you hide the crown 
 even in your heart , there will he rake for it . 
 therefor in fierc tempest is he come , 
 in thunder and in earthquak , like a jove , 
 that if requir fail , he will compel ; 
 and bid you , in the bowel of the lord , 
 deliv up the crown ; and to take merci 
 on the poor soul for whom thi hungri war 
 open hi vasti jaw ; and on your head 
 turn the widow ' tear , the orphan ' cri , 
 the dead men 's blood , the privi maiden ' groan , 
 for husband , father , and betroth lover , 
 that shall be swallow in thi controversi . 
 thi is hi claim , hi threat'n , and my messag ; 
 unless the dauphin be in presenc here , 
 to whom expressli i bring greet too . 
 french king . for us , we will consid of thi further ; 
 to-morrow shall you bear our full intent 
 back to our brother of england . 
 dauphin . for the dauphin : 
 i stand here for him . what to him from england ? 
 exet . scorn and defianc , slight regard , contempt , 
 and anyth that may not misbecom 
 the mighti sender , doth he prize you at . 
 thu say my king : an if your father 's high 
 do not , in grant of all demand at larg , 
 sweeten the bitter mock you sent hi majesti , 
 he 'll call you to so hot an answer of it 
 that cave and wombi vaultag of franc 
 shall chide your trespass and return your mock 
 in second accent of hi ordin . 
 dauphin . say , if my father render fair return , 
 it is against my will ; for i desir 
 noth but odd with england . to that end , 
 as match to hi youth and vaniti , 
 i did present him with the pari ball . 
 exet . he 'll make your pari louvr shake for it , 
 were it the mistress court of mighti europ ; 
 and be assur 'd you 'll find a differ , 
 as we hi subject have in wonder found , 
 between the promis of hi greener day 
 and these he master now . now he weigh time 
 even to the utmost grain ; that you shall read 
 in your own loss , if he stay in franc . 
 french king . to-morrow shall you know our mind at full . 
 exet . dispatch us with all speed , lest that our king 
 come here himself to question our delay ; 
 for he is foot in thi land alreadi . 
 french king . you shall be soon dispatch 'd with fair condit . 
 a night is but small breath and littl paus 
 to answer matter of thi consequ . flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . prologu . 
 
 flourish . enter choru 
 
 choru . thu with imagin 'd wing our swift scene fli , 
 in motion of no less celer 
 than that of thought . suppos that you have seen 
 the well-appoint king at hampton pier 
 embark hi royalti ; and hi brave fleet 
 with silken streamer the young phorbu fan . 
 play with your fanci ; and in them behold 
 upon the hempen tackl ship-boy climb ; 
 hear the shrill whistl which doth order give 
 to sound confu 'd ; behold the threaden sail , 
 born with th ' invis and creep wind , 
 draw the huge bottom through the furrow sea , 
 breast the lofti surg . o , do but think 
 you stand upon the rivag and behold 
 a citi on th ' inconst billow danc ; 
 for so appear thi fleet majest , 
 hold due cours to harfleur . follow , follow ! 
 grappl your mind to sternag of thi navi 
 and leav your england as dead midnight still , 
 guard with grandsir , babi , and old women , 
 either past or not arriv 'd to pith and puissanc ; 
 for who is he whose chin is but enrich 'd 
 with one appear hair that will not follow 
 these cull 'd and choice-drawn cavali to franc ? 
 work , work your thought , and therein see a sieg ; 
 behold the ordnanc on their carriag , 
 with fatal mouth gape on gird harfleur . 
 suppos th ' ambassador from the french come back ; 
 tell harri that the king doth offer him 
 katherin hi daughter , and with her to dowri 
 some petti and unprofit dukedom . 
 the offer like not ; and the nimbl gunner 
 with linstock now the devilish cannon touch , 
 [ alarum , and chamber go off ] 
 and down goe an befor them . still be kind , 
 and eke out our perform with your mind . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene i . 
 franc . befor harfleur 
 
 alarum . enter the king , exet , bedford , gloucest , 
 and soldier with scaling-ladd 
 
 king . onc more unto the breach , dear friend , onc more ; 
 or close the wall up with our english dead . 
 in peac there 's noth so becom a man 
 as modest still and humil ; 
 but when the blast of war blow in our ear , 
 then imit the action of the tiger : 
 stiffen the sinew , summon up the blood , 
 disguis fair natur with hard-favour 'd rage ; 
 then lend the eye a terribl aspect ; 
 let it pri through the portag of the head 
 like the brass cannon : let the brow o'erwhelm it 
 as fear as doth a gall rock 
 o'erhang and jutti hi confound base , 
 swill 'd with the wild and wast ocean . 
 now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide ; 
 hold hard the breath , and bend up everi spirit 
 to hi full height . on , on , you noblest english , 
 whose blood is fet from father of war-proof- 
 father that like so mani alexand 
 have in these part from morn till even fought , 
 and sheath 'd their sword for lack of argument . 
 dishonour not your mother ; now attest 
 that those whom you call 'd father did beget you . 
 be copi now to men of grosser blood , 
 and teach them how to war . and you , good yeomen , 
 whose limb were made in england , show us here 
 the mettl of your pastur ; let us swear 
 that you are worth your breeding- which i doubt not ; 
 for there is none of you so mean and base 
 that hath not nobl lustr in your eye . 
 i see you stand like greyhound in the slip , 
 strain upon the start . the game 's afoot : 
 follow your spirit ; and upon thi charg 
 cri 'god for harri , england , and saint georg ! ' 
 [ exeunt . alarum , and chamber go off ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 befor harfleur 
 
 enter nym , bardolph , pistol , and boy 
 
 bardolph . on , on , on , on , on ! to the breach , to the breach ! 
 nym . pray thee , corpor , stay ; the knock are too hot , and for 
 mine own part i have not a case of live . the humour of it is too 
 hot ; that is the veri plain-song of it . 
 pistol . the plain-song is most just ; for humour do abound : 
 
 knock go and come ; god 's vassal drop and die ; 
 and sword and shield 
 in bloodi field 
 doth win immort fame . 
 
 boy . would i were in an alehous in london ! i wouid give all my 
 fame for a pot of ale and safeti . 
 pistol . and i : 
 
 if wish would prevail with me , 
 my purpos should not fail with me , 
 but thither would i hie . 
 
 boy . as duli , but not as truli , 
 as bird doth sing on bough . 
 
 enter fluellen 
 
 fluellen . up to the breach , you dog ! 
 avaunt , you cullion ! [ drive them forward ] 
 pistol . be merci , great duke , to men of mould . 
 abat thi rage , abat thi manli rage ; 
 abat thi rage , great duke . 
 good bawcock , bate thi rage . use leniti , sweet chuck . 
 nym . these be good humour . your honour win bad humour . 
 exeunt all but boy 
 boy . as young as i am , i have observ 'd these three swasher . i am 
 boy to them all three ; but all they three , though they would 
 serv me , could not be man to me ; for inde three such antic do 
 not amount to a man . for bardolph , he is white-liv 'd and 
 red-fac 'd ; by the mean whereof ' a face it out , but fight not . 
 for pistol , he hath a kill tongu and a quiet sword ; by the 
 mean whereof ' a break word and keep whole weapon . for nym , 
 he hath heard that men of few word are the best men , and 
 therefor he scorn to say hi prayer lest ' a should be thought 
 a coward ; but hi few bad word are match 'd with as few good 
 deed ; for ' a never broke ani man 's head but hi own , and that 
 wa against a post when he wa drunk . they will steal anyth , 
 and call it purchas . bardolph stole a lute-cas , bore it twelv 
 leagu , and sold it for three halfpenc . nym and bardolph are 
 sworn brother in filch , and in calai they stole a 
 fire-shovel ; i knew by that piec of servic the men would carri 
 coal . they would have me as familiar with men 's pocket as their 
 glove or their handkerch ; which make much against my 
 manhood , if i should take from anoth 's pocket to put into mine ; 
 for it is plain pocket up of wrong . i must leav them and 
 seek some better servic ; their villaini goe against my weak 
 stomach , and therefor i must cast it up . exit 
 
 re-ent fluellen , gower follow 
 
 gower . captain fluellen , you must come present to the mine ; the 
 duke of gloucest would speak with you . 
 fluellen . to the mine ! tell you the duke it is not so good to come 
 to the mine ; for , look you , the mine is not accord to the 
 disciplin of the war ; the concav of it is not suffici . 
 for , look you , th ' athversary- you may discuss unto the duke , 
 look you- is digt himself four yard under the countermin ; by 
 cheshu , i think ' a will plow up all , if there is not better 
 direct . 
 gower . the duke of gloucest , to whom the order of the sieg is 
 given , is altogeth direct by an irishman- a veri vallant 
 gentleman , i ' faith . 
 fluellen . it is captain macmorri , is it not ? 
 gower . i think it be . 
 fluellen . by cheshu , he is an ass , as in the world : i will verifi 
 as much in hi beard ; he ha no more direct in the true 
 disciplin of the war , look you , of the roman disciplin , than 
 is a puppy-dog . 
 
 enter macmorri and captain jami 
 
 gower . here ' a come ; and the scot captain , captain jami , with 
 him . 
 fluellen . captain jami is a marvel falor gentleman , that is 
 certain , and of great expedit and knowledg in th ' aunchient 
 war , upon my particular knowledg of hi direct . by cheshu , 
 he will maintain hi argument as well as ani militari man in the 
 world , in the disciplin of the pristin war of the roman . 
 jami . i say gud day , captain fluellen . 
 fluellen . god-den to your worship , good captain jame . 
 gower . how now , captain macmorri ! have you quit the mine ? have 
 the pioneer given o'er ? 
 macmorri . by chrish , la , tish ill done ! the work ish give over , 
 the trompet sound the retreat . by my hand , i swear , and my 
 father 's soul , the work ish ill done ; it ish give over ; i would 
 have blow up the town , so chrish save me , la , in an hour . o , 
 tish ill done , tish ill done ; by my hand , tish ill done ! 
 fluellen . captain macmorri , i beseech you now , will you voutsaf 
 me , look you , a few disput with you , as partli touch or 
 concern the disciplin of the war , the roman war , in the way 
 of argument , look you , and friendli commun ; partli to 
 satisfi my opinion , and partli for the satisfact , look you , of 
 my mind , as touch the direct of the militari disciplin , 
 that is the point . 
 jami . it sall be vari gud , gud feith , gud captain bath ; and i sall 
 quit you with gud leve , as i may pick occas ; that sall i , 
 marri . 
 macmorri . it is no time to discours , so chrish save me . the day 
 is hot , and the weather , and the war , and the king , and the 
 duke ; it is no time to discours . the town is beseech 'd , and the 
 trumpet call us to the breach ; and we talk and , be chrish , do 
 noth . 't is shame for us all , so god sa ' me , 't is shame to 
 stand still ; it is shame , by my hand ; and there is throat to be 
 cut , and work to be done ; and there ish noth done , so chrish 
 sa ' me , la . 
 jami . by the mess , ere theis eye of mine take themselv to 
 slomber , ay 'll de gud servic , or i 'll lig i ' th ' grund for it ; 
 ay , or go to death . and i 'll pay't as valor as i may , that 
 sall i suerli do , that is the breff and the long . marri , i wad 
 full fain heard some question 'tween you tway . 
 fluellen . captain macmorri , i think , look you , under your 
 correct , there is not mani of your nation- 
 macmorri . of my nation ? what ish my nation ? ish a villain , and a 
 bastard , and a knave , and a rascal . what ish my nation ? who talk 
 of my nation ? 
 fluellen . look you , if you take the matter otherwis than is meant , 
 captain macmorri , peradventur i shall think you do not use me 
 with that affabl as in discret you ought to use me , look 
 you ; be as good a man as yourself , both in the disciplin of 
 war and in the deriv of my birth , and in other 
 particular . 
 macmorri . i do not know you so good a man as myself ; so 
 chrish save me , i will cut off your head . 
 gower . gentlemen both , you will mistak each other . 
 jami . ah ! that 's a foul fault . [ a parley sound ] 
 gower . the town sound a parley . 
 fluellen . captain macmorri , when there is more better opportun 
 to be requir , look you , i will be so bold as to tell you i know 
 the disciplin of war ; and there is an end . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 befor the gate of harfleur 
 
 enter the governor and some citizen on the wall . enter the king 
 and all hi train befor the gate 
 
 king henri . how yet resolv the governor of the town ? 
 thi is the latest parl we will admit ; 
 therefor to our best merci give yourselv 
 or , like to men proud of destruct , 
 defi us to our worst ; for , as i am a soldier , 
 a name that in my thought becom me best , 
 if i begin the batt'ri onc again , 
 i will not leav the half-achiev harfleur 
 till in her ash she lie buri . 
 the gate of merci shall be all shut up , 
 and the flesh 'd soldier , rough and hard of heart , 
 in liberti of bloodi hand shall rang 
 with conscienc wide as hell , mow like grass 
 your fresh fair virgin and your flow'r infant . 
 what is it then to me if impiou war , 
 array 'd in flame , like to the princ of fiend , 
 do , with hi smirch 'd complexion , all fell feat 
 enlink 'd to wast and desol ? 
 what is't to me when you yourselv are caus , 
 if your pure maiden fall into the hand 
 of hot and forc violat ? 
 what rein can hold licenti wickedn 
 when down the hill he hold hi fierc career ? 
 we may as bootless spend our vain command 
 upon th ' enrag soldier in their spoil , 
 as send precept to the leviathan 
 to come ashor . therefor , you men of harfleur , 
 take piti of your town and of your peopl 
 while yet my soldier are in my command ; 
 while yet the cool and temper wind of grace 
 o'erblow the filthi and contagi cloud 
 of headi murder , spoil , and villaini . 
 if not- whi , in a moment look to see 
 the blind and bloodi with foul hand 
 defil the lock of your shrill-shriek daughter ; 
 your father taken by the silver beard , 
 and their most reverend head dash 'd to the wall ; 
 your nake infant spit upon pike , 
 while the mad mother with their howl confu 'd 
 do break the cloud , as did the wive of jewri 
 at herod 's bloody-hunt slaughtermen . 
 what say you ? will you yield , and thi avoid ? 
 or , guilti in defenc , be thu destroy 'd ? 
 governor . our expect hath thi day an end : 
 the dauphin , whom of succour we entreat , 
 return us that hi power are yet not readi 
 to rais so great a sieg . therefor , great king , 
 we yield our town and live to thi soft merci . 
 enter our gate ; dispos of us and our ; 
 for we no longer are defens . 
 king henri . open your gate . [ exit governor ] come , uncl exet , 
 go you and enter harfleur ; there remain , 
 and fortifi it strongli 'gainst the french ; 
 use merci to them all . for us , dear uncl , 
 the winter come on , and sick grow 
 upon our soldier , we will retir to calai . 
 to-night in harfleur will we be your guest ; 
 to-morrow for the march are we addrest . 
 [ flourish . the king and hi train enter the town ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 rouen . the french king 's palac 
 
 enter katherin and alic 
 
 katherin . alic , tu as ete en angleterr , et tu parl bien le 
 langag . 
 alic . un peu , madam . 
 katherin . je te prie , m'enseignez ; il faut que j'apprenn a 
 parler . comment appelez-v la main en anglai ? 
 alic . la main ? ell est appele de hand . 
 katherin . de hand . et le doigt ? 
 alic . le doigt ? ma foi , j'oubli le doigt ; mai je me 
 souviendrai . le doigt ? je pens qu'il sont appel de fingr ; 
 oui , de fingr . 
 katherin . la main , de hand ; le doigt , de fingr . je pens que 
 je sui le bon ecoli ; j'ai gagn deux mot d'anglai vitement . 
 comment appelez-v le ongl ? 
 alic . le ongl ? nou le appelon de nail . 
 katherin . de nail . ecoutez ; dites-moi si je parl bien : de hand , 
 de fingr , et de nail . 
 alic . c'est bien dit , madam ; il est fort bon anglai . 
 katherin . dites-moi l'anglai pour le bra . 
 alic . de arm , madam . 
 katherin . et le coud ? 
 alic . d'elbow . 
 katherin . d'elbow . je m'en fai la repetit de tou le mot que 
 vou m'avez appri de a present . 
 alic . il est trop difficil , madam , comm je pens . 
 katherin . excusez-moi , alic ; ecoutez : d'hand , de fingr , de 
 nail , d'arma , de bilbow . 
 alic . d'elbow , madam . 
 katherin . o seigneur dieu , je m'en oubli ! d'elbow . 
 comment appelez-v le col ? 
 alic . de nick , madam . 
 katherin . de nick . et le menton ? 
 alic . de chin . 
 katherin . de sin . le col , de nick ; le menton , de sin . 
 alic . oui . sauf votr honneur , en verit , vou prononcez le mot 
 aussi droit que le natif d'angleterr . 
 katherin . je ne dout point d'apprendr , par la grace de dieu , et 
 en peu de temp . 
 alic . n'avez-v pa deja oubli ce que je vou ai enseign ? 
 katherin . non , je reciterai a vou promptement : d'hand , de fingr , 
 de mails- 
 alic . de nail , madam . 
 katherin . de nail , de arm , de ilbow . 
 alic . sauf votr honneur , d'elbow . 
 katherin . ainsi dis-j ; d'elbow , de nick , et de sin . comment 
 appelez-v le pie et la robe ? 
 alic . le foot , madam ; et le count . 
 katherin . le foot et le count . o seigneur dieu ! il sont mot de 
 son mauvai , corrupt , gro , et impudiqu , et non pour le 
 dame d'honneur d'user : je ne voudrai prononc ce mot devant 
 le seigneur de franc pour tout le mond . foh ! le foot et le 
 count ! neanmoin , je reciterai une autr foi ma lecon ensembl : 
 d'hand , de fingr , de nail , d'arm , d'elbow , de nick , de sin , de 
 foot , le count . 
 alic . excel , madam ! 
 katherin . c'est assez pour une foi : allons-n a diner . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 the french king 's palac 
 
 enter the king of franc , the dauphin , duke of britain , 
 the constabl of franc , and other 
 
 french king . 't is certain he hath pass 'd the river somm . 
 constabl . and if he be not fought withal , my lord , 
 let us not live in franc ; let us quit an , 
 and give our vineyard to a barbar peopl . 
 dauphin . o dieu vivant ! shall a few spray of us , 
 the empti of our father ' luxuri , 
 our scion , put in wild and savag stock , 
 spirt up so suddenli into the cloud , 
 and overlook their grafter ? 
 britain . norman , but bastard norman , norman bastard ! 
 mort dieu , ma vie ! if they march along 
 unfought withal , but i will sell my dukedom 
 to buy a slobb'ri and a dirti farm 
 in that nook-shotten isl of albion . 
 constabl . dieu de batail ! where have they thi mettl ? 
 is not their climat foggi , raw , and dull ; 
 on whom , as in despit , the sun look pale , 
 kill their fruit with frown ? can sodden water , 
 a drench for sur-rein 'd jade , their barley-broth , 
 decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat ? 
 and shall our quick blood , spirit with wine , 
 seem frosti ? o , for honour of our land , 
 let us not hang like rope icicl 
 upon our hous ' thatch , while a more frosti peopl 
 sweat drop of gallant youth in our rich fields- 
 poor we call them in their nativ lord ! 
 dauphin . by faith and honour , 
 our madam mock at us and plainli say 
 our mettl is bred out , and they will give 
 their bodi to the lust of english youth 
 to new-stor franc with bastard warrior . 
 britain . they bid us to the english dancing-school 
 and teach lavolta high and swift coranto , 
 say our grace is onli in our heel 
 and that we are most lofti runaway . 
 french king . where is montjoy the herald ? speed him henc ; 
 let him greet england with our sharp defianc . 
 up , princ , and , with spirit of honour edg 
 more sharper than your sword , hie to the field : 
 charl delabreth , high constabl of franc ; 
 you duke of orlean , bourbon , and of berri , 
 alengon , brabant , bar , and burgundi ; 
 jaqu chatillon , rambur , vaudemont , 
 beaumont , grandpr , roussi , and fauconbridg , 
 foix , lestrak , bouciqualt , and charoloi ; 
 high duke , great princ , baron , lord , and knight , 
 for your great seat now quit you of great shame . 
 bar harri england , that sweep through our land 
 with pennon paint in the blood of harfleur . 
 rush on hi host as doth the melt snow 
 upon the valley , whose low vassal seat 
 the alp doth spit and void hi rheum upon ; 
 go down upon him , you have power enough , 
 and in a captiv chariot into rouen 
 bring him our prison . 
 constabl . thi becom the great . 
 sorri am i hi number are so few , 
 hi soldier sick and famish 'd in their march ; 
 for i am sure , when he shall see our armi , 
 he 'll drop hi heart into the sink of fear , 
 and for achiev offer us hi ransom . 
 french king . therefor , lord constabl , hast on montjoy , 
 and let him say to england that we send 
 to know what will ransom he will give . 
 princ dauphin , you shall stay with us in rouen . 
 dauphin . not so , i do beseech your majesti . 
 french king . be patient , for you shall remain with us . 
 now forth , lord constabl and princ all , 
 and quickli bring us word of england 's fall . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 the english camp in picardi 
 
 enter captain , english and welsh , gower and fluellen 
 
 gower . how now , captain fluellen ! come you from the bridg ? 
 fluellen . i assur you there is veri excel servic commit 
 at the bridg . 
 gower . is the duke of exet safe ? 
 fluellen . the duke of exet is as magnanim as agamemnon ; and a 
 man that i love and honour with my soul , and my heart , and my 
 duti , and my live , and my live , and my uttermost power . he is 
 not- god be prais and bless ! - ani hurt in the world , but 
 keep the bridg most valiantli , with excel disciplin . there 
 is an aunchient lieuten there at the bridge- i think in my 
 veri conscienc he is as valiant a man as mark antoni ; and he is 
 man of no estim in the world ; but i did see him do as 
 gallant servic . 
 gower . what do you call him ? 
 fluellen . he is call 'd aunchient pistol . 
 gower . i know him not . 
 
 enter pistol 
 
 fluellen . here is the man . 
 pistol . captain , i thee beseech to do me favour . 
 the duke of exet doth love thee well . 
 fluellen . ay , i prais god ; and i have merit some love at hi 
 hand . 
 pistol . bardolph , a soldier , firm and sound of heart , 
 and of buxom valour , hath by cruel fate 
 and giddi fortun 's furiou fickl wheel , 
 that goddess blind , 
 that stand upon the roll restless stone- 
 fluellen . by your patienc , aunchient pistol . fortun is paint 
 blind , with a muffler afor her eye , to signifi to you that 
 fortun is blind ; and she is paint also with a wheel , to 
 signifi to you , which is the moral of it , that she is turn , 
 and inconst , and mutabl , and variat ; and her foot , look 
 you , is fix upon a spheric stone , which roll , and roll , and 
 roll . in good truth , the poet make a most excel descript 
 of it : fortun is an excel moral . 
 pistol . fortun is bardolph 's foe , and frown on him ; 
 for he hath stol'n a pax , and hang must ' a be- 
 a damn death ! 
 let gallow gape for dog ; let man go free , 
 and let not hemp hi windpip suffoc . 
 but exet hath given the doom of death 
 for pax of littl price . 
 therefor , go speak- the duke will hear thi voic ; 
 and let not bardolph 's vital thread be cut 
 with edg of penni cord and vile reproach . 
 speak , captain , for hi life , and i will thee requit . 
 fluellen . aunchient pistol , i do partli understand your mean . 
 pistol . whi then , rejoic therefor . 
 fluellen . certainli , aunchient , it is not a thing to rejoic at ; 
 for if , look you , he were my brother , i would desir the duke to 
 use hi good pleasur , and put him to execut ; for disciplin 
 ought to be use . 
 pistol . die and be damn 'd ! and figo for thi friendship ! 
 fluellen . it is well . 
 pistol . the fig of spain ! exit 
 fluellen . veri good . 
 gower . whi , thi is an arrant counterfeit rascal ; i rememb him 
 now- a bawd , a cutpurs . 
 fluellen . i 'll assur you , ' a utt'r as prave word at the pridg 
 as you shall see in a summer 's day . but it is veri well ; what he 
 ha spoke to me , that is well , i warrant you , when time is serv . 
 gower . whi , 't is a gull a fool a rogu , that now and then goe to 
 the war to grace himself , at hi return into london , under the 
 form of a soldier . and such fellow are perfect in the great 
 command ' name ; and they will learn you by rote where servic 
 were done- at such and such a sconc , at such a breach , at such a 
 convoy ; who came off brave , who wa shot , who disgrac 'd , what 
 term the enemi stood on ; and thi they con perfectli in the 
 phrase of war , which they trick up with new-tun oath ; and what 
 a beard of the gener 's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will 
 do among foam bottl and ale-wash 'd wit is wonder to be 
 thought on . but you must learn to know such slander of the age , 
 or els you may be marvel mistook . 
 fluellen . i tell you what , captain gower , i do perceiv he is not 
 the man that he would gladli make show to the world he is ; if i 
 find a hole in hi coat i will tell him my mind . [ drum within ] 
 hark you , the king is come ; and i must speak with him from the 
 pridg . 
 
 drum and colour . enter the king and hi poor soldier , 
 and gloucest 
 
 god pless your majesti ! 
 king henri . how now , fluellen ! cam'st thou from the bridg ? 
 fluellen . ay , so pleas your majesti . the duke of exet ha veri 
 gallantli maintain 'd the pridg ; the french is gone off , look 
 you , and there is gallant and most prave passag . marri , th ' 
 athversari wa have possess of the pridg ; but he is enforc 
 to retir , and the duke of exet is master of the pridg ; i can 
 tell your majesti the duke is a prave man . 
 king henri . what men have you lost , fluellen ! 
 fluellen . the perdit of th ' athversari hath been veri great , 
 reason great ; marri , for my part , i think the duke hath lost 
 never a man , but one that is like to be execut for rob a 
 church- one bardolph , if your majesti know the man ; hi face is 
 all bubukl , and whelk , and knob , and flame o ' fire ; and hi 
 lip blow at hi nose , and it is like a coal of fire , sometim 
 plue and sometim red ; but hi nose is execut and hi fire 's 
 out . 
 king henri . we would have all such offend so cut off . and we 
 give express charg that in our march through the countri there 
 be noth compel 'd from the villag , noth taken but paid 
 for , none of the french upbraid or abus in disdain 
 languag ; for when leniti and cruelti play for a kingdom the 
 gentler gamest is the soonest winner . 
 
 tucket . enter montjoy 
 
 montjoy . you know me by my habit . 
 king henri . well then , i know thee ; what shall i know of thee ? 
 montjoy . my master 's mind . 
 king henri . unfold it . 
 montjoy . thu say my king . say thou to harri of england : though we 
 seem 'd dead we did but sleep ; advantag is a better soldier than 
 rash . tell him we could have rebuk 'd him at harfleur , but 
 that we thought not good to bruis an injuri till it were full 
 ripe . now we speak upon our cue , and our voic is imperi : 
 england shall repent hi folli , see hi weak , and admir our 
 suffer . bid him therefor consid of hi ransom , which must 
 proport the loss we have born , the subject we have lost , 
 the disgrac we have digest ; which , in weight to re-answ , hi 
 petti would bow under . for our loss hi exchequ is too 
 poor ; for th ' effus of our blood , the muster of hi kingdom 
 too faint a number ; and for our disgrac , hi own person kneel 
 at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfact . to thi add 
 defianc ; and tell him , for conclus , he hath betray hi 
 follow , whose condemn is pronounc 'd . so far my king and 
 master ; so much my offic . 
 king henri . what is thi name ? i know thi qualiti . 
 montjoy . montjoy . 
 king henri . thou dost thi offic fairli . turn thee back , 
 and tell thi king i do not seek him now , 
 but could be will to march on to calai 
 without impeach ; for , to say the sooth- 
 though 't is no wisdom to confess so much 
 unto an enemi of craft and vantage- 
 my peopl are with sick much enfeebl ; 
 my number lessen 'd ; and those few i have 
 almost no better than so mani french ; 
 who when they were in health , i tell thee , herald , 
 i thought upon one pair of english leg 
 did march three frenchmen . yet forgiv me , god , 
 that i do brag thu ; thi your air of franc 
 hath blown that vice in me ; i must repent . 
 go , therefor , tell thi master here i am ; 
 my ransom is thi frail and worthless trunk ; 
 my armi but a weak and sickli guard ; 
 yet , god befor , tell him we will come on , 
 though franc himself and such anoth neighbour 
 stand in our way . there 's for thi labour , montjoy . 
 go , bid thi master well advis himself . 
 if we may pass , we will ; if we be hind'r , 
 we shall your tawni ground with your red blood 
 discolour ; and so , montjoy , fare you well . 
 the sum of all our answer is but thi : 
 we would not seek a battl as we are ; 
 nor as we are , we say , we will not shun it . 
 so tell your master . 
 montjoy . i shall deliv so . thank to your high . exit 
 gloucest . i hope they will not come upon us now . 
 king henri . we are in god 's hand , brother , not in their . 
 march to the bridg , it now draw toward night ; 
 beyond the river we 'll encamp ourselv , 
 and on to-morrow bid them march away . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 the french camp near agincourt 
 
 enter the constabl of franc , the lord rambur , the duke of orlean , 
 the dauphin , with other 
 
 constabl . tut ! i have the best armour of the world . 
 would it were day ! 
 orlean . you have an excel armour ; but let my hors have hi 
 due . 
 constabl . it is the best hors of europ . 
 orlean . will it never be morn ? 
 dauphin . my lord of orlean and my lord high constabl , you talk of 
 hors and armour ? 
 orlean . you are as well provid of both as ani princ in the 
 world . 
 dauphin . what a long night is thi ! i will not chang my hors with 
 ani that tread but on four pastern . ca , ha ! he bound from the 
 earth as if hi entrail were hair ; le cheval volant , the 
 pegasu , chez le narin de feu ! when i bestrid him i soar , i 
 am a hawk . he trot the air ; the earth sing when he touch it ; 
 the basest horn of hi hoof is more music than the pipe of 
 herm . 
 orlean . he 's of the colour of the nutmeg . 
 dauphin . and of the heat of the ginger . it is a beast for perseu : 
 he is pure air and fire ; and the dull element of earth and water 
 never appear in him , but onli in patient still while hi 
 rider mount him ; he is inde a hors , and all other jade you 
 may call beast . 
 constabl . inde , my lord , it is a most absolut and excel 
 hors . 
 dauphin . it is the princ of palfrey ; hi neigh is like the 
 bid of a monarch , and hi counten enforc homag . 
 orlean . no more , cousin . 
 dauphin . nay , the man hath no wit that can not , from the rise of 
 the lark to the lodg of the lamb , vari deserv prais on my 
 palfrey . it is a theme as fluent as the sea : turn the sand into 
 eloqu tongu , and my hors is argument for them all : 't is a 
 subject for a sovereign to reason on , and for a sovereign 's 
 sovereign to ride on ; and for the world- familiar to us and 
 unknown- to lay apart their particular function and wonder at 
 him . i onc writ a sonnet in hi prais and began thu : 'wonder 
 of nature'- 
 orlean . i have heard a sonnet begin so to one 's mistress . 
 dauphin . then did they imit that which i compo 'd to my courser ; 
 for my hors is my mistress . 
 orlean . your mistress bear well . 
 dauphin . me well ; which is the prescript prais and perfect of a 
 good and particular mistress . 
 constabl . nay , for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdli 
 shook your back . 
 dauphin . so perhap did your . 
 constabl . mine wa not bridl . 
 dauphin . o , then belik she wa old and gentl ; and you rode like a 
 kern of ireland , your french hose off and in your strait 
 strosser . 
 constabl . you have good judgment in horsemanship . 
 dauphin . be warn 'd by me , then : they that ride so , and ride not 
 warili , fall into foul bog . i had rather have my hors to my 
 mistress . 
 constabl . i had as lief have my mistress a jade . 
 dauphin . i tell thee , constabl , my mistress wear hi own hair . 
 constabl . i could make as true a boast as that , if i had a sow to 
 my mistress . 
 dauphin . 'le chien est retourn a son propr vomiss , et la 
 truie lave au bourbier . ' thou mak'st use of anyth . 
 constabl . yet do i not use my hors for my mistress , or ani such 
 proverb so littl kin to the purpos . 
 rambur . my lord constabl , the armour that i saw in your tent 
 to-night- are those star or sun upon it ? 
 constabl . star , my lord . 
 dauphin . some of them will fall to-morrow , i hope . 
 constabl . and yet my sky shall not want . 
 dauphin . that may be , for you bear a mani superflu , and 'twere 
 more honour some were away . 
 constabl . ev'n as your hors bear your prais , who would trot as 
 well were some of your brag dismount . 
 dauphin . would i were abl to load him with hi desert ! will it 
 never be day ? i will trot to-morrow a mile , and my way shall be 
 pave with english face . 
 constabl . i will not say so , for fear i should be fac 'd out of my 
 way ; but i would it were morn , for i would fain be about the 
 ear of the english . 
 rambur . who will go to hazard with me for twenti prison ? 
 constabl . you must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them . 
 dauphin . 't is midnight ; i 'll go arm myself . exit 
 orlean . the dauphin long for morn . 
 rambur . he long to eat the english . 
 constabl . i think he will eat all he kill . 
 orlean . by the white hand of my ladi , he 's a gallant princ . 
 constabl . swear by her foot , that she may tread out the oath . 
 orlean . he is simpli the most activ gentleman of franc . 
 constabl . do is activ , and he will still be do . 
 orlean . he never did harm that i heard of . 
 constabl . nor will do none to-morrow : he will keep that good name 
 still . 
 orlean . i know him to be valiant . 
 constabl . i wa told that by one that know him better than you . 
 orlean . what 's he ? 
 constabl . marri , he told me so himself ; and he said he car 'd not 
 who knew it . 
 orlean . he need not ; it is no hidden virtu in him . 
 constabl . by my faith , sir , but it is ; never anybodi saw it but 
 hi lackey . 
 't is a hood valour , and when it appear it will bate . 
 orlean . ill-wind never said well . 
 constabl . i will cap that proverb with 'there is flatteri in 
 friendship . ' 
 orlean . and i will take up that with 'give the devil hi due . ' 
 constabl . well plac 'd ! there stand your friend for the devil ; 
 have at the veri eye of that proverb with ' a pox of the devil ! ' 
 orlean . you are the better at proverb by how much ' a fool 's bolt 
 is soon shot . ' 
 constabl . you have shot over . 
 orlean . 't is not the first time you were overshot . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . my lord high constabl , the english lie within fifteen 
 hundr pace of your tent . 
 constabl . who hath measur 'd the ground ? 
 messeng . the lord grandpr . 
 constabl . a valiant and most expert gentleman . would it were day ! 
 ala , poor harri of england ! he long not for the dawn as we 
 do . 
 orlean . what a wretch and peevish fellow is thi king of 
 england , to mope with hi fat-brain 'd follow so far out of hi 
 knowledg ! 
 constabl . if the english had ani apprehens , they would run 
 away . 
 orlean . that they lack ; for if their head had ani intellectu 
 armour , they could never wear such heavi head-piec . 
 rambur . that island of england breed veri valiant creatur ; 
 their mastiff are of unmatch courag . 
 orlean . foolish cur , that run wink into the mouth of a russian 
 bear , and have their head crush 'd like rotten appl ! you may as 
 well say that 's a valiant flea that dare eat hi breakfast on the 
 lip of a lion . 
 constabl . just , just ! and the men do sympathis with the mastiff 
 in robusti and rough come on , leav their wit with their 
 wive ; and then give them great meal of beef and iron and steel ; 
 they will eat like wolv and fight like devil . 
 orlean . ay , but these english are shrewdli out of beef . 
 constabl . then shall we find to-morrow they have onli stomach to 
 eat , and none to fight . now is it time to arm . come , shall we 
 about it ? 
 orlean . it is now two o'clock ; but let me see- by ten 
 we shall have each a hundr englishmen . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . prologu . 
 
 enter choru 
 
 choru . now entertain conjectur of a time 
 when creep murmur and the pore dark 
 fill the wide vessel of the univers . 
 from camp to camp , through the foul womb of night , 
 the hum of either armi stilli sound , 
 that the fix 'd sentinel almost receiv 
 the secret whisper of each other 's watch . 
 fire answer fire , and through their pali flame 
 each battl see the other 's umber 'd face ; 
 steed threaten steed , in high and boast neigh 
 pierc the night 's dull ear ; and from the tent 
 the armour accomplish the knight , 
 with busi hammer close rivet up , 
 give dread note of prepar . 
 the countri cock do crow , the clock do ton , 
 and the third hour of drowsi morn name . 
 proud of their number and secur in soul , 
 the confid and over-lusti french 
 do the low-rat english play at dice ; 
 and chide the crippl tardy-gait night 
 who like a foul and ugli witch doth limp 
 so tedious away . the poor condemn english , 
 like sacrific , by their watch fire 
 sit patient and inli rumin 
 the morn 's danger ; and their gestur sad 
 invest lank-lean cheek and war-worn coat 
 presenteth them unto the gaze moon 
 so mani horrid ghost . o , now , who will behold 
 the royal captain of thi ruin 'd band 
 walk from watch to watch , from tent to tent , 
 let him cri 'prais and glori on hi head ! ' 
 for forth he goe and visit all hi host ; 
 bid them good morrow with a modest smile , 
 and call them brother , friend , and countrymen . 
 upon hi royal face there is no note 
 how dread an armi hath enround him ; 
 nor doth he dedic one jot of colour 
 unto the weari and all-watch night ; 
 but freshli look , and over-bear attaint 
 with cheer semblanc and sweet majesti ; 
 that everi wretch , pine and pale befor , 
 behold him , pluck comfort from hi look ; 
 a largess univers , like the sun , 
 hi liber eye doth give to everi one , 
 thaw cold fear , that mean and gentl all 
 behold , as may unworthi defin , 
 a littl touch of harri in the night . 
 and so our scene must to the battl fli ; 
 where- o for piti ! - we shall much disgrac 
 with four or five most vile and rag foil , 
 right ill-dispo 'd in brawl ridicul , 
 the name of agincourt . yet sit and see , 
 mind true thing by what their mock'ri be . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene i . 
 franc . the english camp at agincourt 
 
 enter the king , bedford , and gloucest 
 
 king henri . gloucest , 't is true that we are in great danger ; 
 the greater therefor should our courag be . 
 good morrow , brother bedford . god almighti ! 
 there is some soul of good in thing evil , 
 would men observingli distil it out ; 
 for our bad neighbour make us earli stirrer , 
 which is both health and good husbandri . 
 besid , they are our outward conscienc 
 and preacher to us all , admonish 
 that we should dress us fairli for our end . 
 thu may we gather honey from the weed , 
 and make a moral of the devil himself . 
 
 enter erpingham 
 
 good morrow , old sir thoma erpingham : 
 a good soft pillow for that good white head 
 were better than a churlish turf of franc . 
 erpingham . not so , my lieg ; thi lodg like me better , 
 sinc i may say 'now lie i like a king . ' 
 king henri . 't is good for men to love their present pain 
 upon exampl ; so the spirit is eas ; 
 and when the mind is quick'n , out of doubt 
 the organ , though defunct and dead befor , 
 break up their drowsi grave and newli move 
 with cast slough and fresh leger . 
 lend me thi cloak , sir thoma . brother both , 
 commend me to the princ in our camp ; 
 do my good morrow to them , and anon 
 desir them all to my pavilion . 
 gloucest . we shall , my lieg . 
 erpingham . shall i attend your grace ? 
 king henri . no , my good knight : 
 go with my brother to my lord of england ; 
 i and my bosom must debat awhil , 
 and then i would no other compani . 
 erpingham . the lord in heaven bless thee , nobl harri ! 
 exeunt all but the king 
 king henri . god-a-merci , old heart ! thou speak'st cheer . 
 
 enter pistol 
 
 pistol . qui va la ? 
 king henri . a friend . 
 pistol . discuss unto me : art thou offic , 
 or art thou base , common , and popular ? 
 king henri . i am a gentleman of a compani . 
 pistol . trail'st thou the puissant pike ? 
 king henri . even so . what are you ? 
 pistol . as good a gentleman as the emperor . 
 king henri . then you are a better than the king . 
 pistol . the king 's a bawcock and a heart of gold , 
 a lad of life , an imp of fame ; 
 of parent good , of fist most valiant . 
 i kiss hi dirti shoe , and from heart-str 
 i love the love bulli . what is thi name ? 
 king henri . harri le roy . 
 pistol . le roy ! a cornish name ; art thou of cornish crew ? 
 king henri . no , i am a welshman . 
 pistol . know'st thou fluellen ? 
 king henri . ye . 
 pistol . tell him i 'll knock hi leek about hi pate 
 upon saint davi 's day . 
 king henri . do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day , lest 
 he knock that about your . 
 pistol . art thou hi friend ? 
 king henri . and hi kinsman too . 
 pistol . the figo for thee , then ! 
 king henri . i thank you ; god be with you ! 
 pistol . my name is pistol call 'd . exit 
 king henri . it sort well with your fierc . 
 
 enter fluellen and gower 
 
 gower . captain fluellen ! 
 fluellen . so ! in the name of jesu christ , speak fewer . it is the 
 greatest admir in the univers world , when the true and 
 aunchient prerogatif and law of the war is not kept : if you 
 would take the pain but to examin the war of pompey the great , 
 you shall find , i warrant you , that there is no tiddle-taddl nor 
 pibble-pabbl in pompey 's camp ; i warrant you , you shall find the 
 ceremoni of the war , and the care of it , and the form of it , 
 and the sobrieti of it , and the modesti of it , to be otherwis . 
 gower . whi , the enemi is loud ; you hear him all night . 
 fluellen . if the enemi is an ass , and a fool , and a prate 
 coxcomb , is it meet , think you , that we should also , look you , be 
 an ass , and a fool , and a prate coxcomb ? in your own 
 conscienc , now ? 
 gower . i will speak lower . 
 fluellen . i pray you and beseech you that you will . 
 exeunt gower and fluellen 
 king henri . though it appear a littl out of fashion , 
 there is much care and valour in thi welshman . 
 
 enter three soldier : john bate , alexand court , 
 and michael william 
 
 court . brother john bate , is not that the morn which break 
 yonder ? 
 bate . i think it be ; but we have no great caus to desir the 
 approach of day . 
 william . we see yonder the begin of the day , but i think we 
 shall never see the end of it . who goe there ? 
 king henri . a friend . 
 william . under what captain serv you ? 
 king henri . under sir thoma erpingham . 
 william . a good old command and a most kind gentleman . i pray 
 you , what think he of our estat ? 
 king henri . even as men wreck 'd upon a sand , that look to be wash 'd 
 off the next tide . 
 bate . he hath not told hi thought to the king ? 
 king henri . no ; nor it is not meet he should . for though i speak it 
 to you , i think the king is but a man as i am : the violet smell 
 to him as it doth to me ; the element show to him as it doth to 
 me ; all hi sens have but human condit ; hi ceremoni laid 
 by , in hi naked he appear but a man ; and though hi 
 affect are higher mount than our , yet , when they stoop , 
 they stoop with the like wing . therefor , when he see reason of 
 fear , as we do , hi fear , out of doubt , be of the same relish 
 as our are ; yet , in reason , no man should possess him with ani 
 appear of fear , lest he , by show it , should dishearten hi 
 armi . 
 bate . he may show what outward courag he will ; but i believ , as 
 cold a night as 't is , he could wish himself in thame up to the 
 neck ; and so i would he were , and i by him , at all adventur , so 
 we were quit here . 
 king henri . by my troth , i will speak my conscienc of the king : i 
 think he would not wish himself anywher but where he is . 
 bate . then i would he were here alon ; so should he be sure to be 
 ransom , and a mani poor men 's live save . 
 king henri . i dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here 
 alon , howsoev you speak thi , to feel other men 's mind ; 
 methink i could not die anywher so content as in the king 's 
 compani , hi caus be just and hi quarrel honour . 
 william . that 's more than we know . 
 bate . ay , or more than we should seek after ; for we know enough if 
 we know we are the king 's subject . if hi caus be wrong , our 
 obedi to the king wipe the crime of it out of us . 
 william . but if the caus be not good , the king himself hath a 
 heavi reckon to make when all those leg and arm and head , 
 chopp 'd off in a battl , shall join togeth at the latter day 
 and cri all 'we die at such a place'- some swear , some cri 
 for a surgeon , some upon their wive left poor behind them , some 
 upon the debt they owe , some upon their children rawli left . i 
 am afeard there are few die well that die in a battl ; for how 
 can they charit dispos of anyth when blood is their 
 argument ? now , if these men do not die well , it will be a black 
 matter for the king that led them to it ; who to disobey were 
 against all proport of subject . 
 king henri . so , if a son that is by hi father sent about 
 merchandis do sin miscarri upon the sea , the imput of 
 hi wicked , by your rule , should be impos upon hi father 
 that sent him ; or if a servant , under hi master 's command 
 transport a sum of money , be assail by robber and die in 
 mani irreconcil 'd iniqu , you may call the busi of the 
 master the author of the servant 's damnat . but thi is not so : 
 the king is not bound to answer the particular end of hi 
 soldier , the father of hi son , nor the master of hi servant ; 
 for they purpos not their death when they purpos their 
 servic . besid , there is no king , be hi caus never so 
 spotless , if it come to the arbitr of sword , can tri it out 
 with all unspot soldier : some peradventur have on them the 
 guilt of premedit and contriv murder ; some , of beguil 
 virgin with the broken seal of perjuri ; some , make the war 
 their bulwark , that have befor gore the gentl bosom of peac 
 with pillag and robberi . now , if these men have defeat the law 
 and outrun nativ punish , though they can outstrip men they 
 have no wing to fli from god : war is hi beadl , war is hi 
 vengeanc ; so that here men are punish 'd for before-breach of the 
 king 's law in now the king 's quarrel . where they fear the 
 death they have born life away ; and where they would be safe 
 they perish . then if they die unprovid , no more is the king 
 guilti of their damnat than he wa befor guilti of those 
 impieti for the which they are now visit . everi subject 's 
 duti is the king 's ; but everi subject 's soul is hi own . 
 therefor should everi soldier in the war do as everi sick man 
 in hi bed- wash everi mote out of hi conscienc ; and die so , 
 death is to him advantag ; or not die , the time wa blessedli 
 lost wherein such prepar wa gain ; and in him that escap 
 it were not sin to think that , make god so free an offer , he 
 let him outliv that day to see hi great , and to teach 
 other how they should prepar . 
 william . 't is certain , everi man that die ill , the ill upon hi 
 own head- the king is not to answer for it . 
 bate . i do not desir he should answer for me , and yet i determin 
 to fight lustili for him . 
 king henri . i myself heard the king say he would not be ransom 'd . 
 william . ay , he said so , to make us fight cheer ; but when our 
 throat are cut he may be ransom 'd , and we ne'er the wiser . 
 king henri . if i live to see it , i will never trust hi word after . 
 william . you pay him then ! that 's a peril shot out of an 
 elder-gun , that a poor and a privat displeasur can do against a 
 monarch ! you may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with 
 fan in hi face with a peacock 's feather . you 'll never trust 
 hi word after ! come , 't is a foolish say . 
 king henri . your reproof is someth too round ; i should be angri 
 with you , if the time were conveni . 
 william . let it be a quarrel between us if you live . 
 king henri . i embrac it . 
 william . how shall i know thee again ? 
 king henri . give me ani gage of thine , and i will wear it in my 
 bonnet ; then if ever thou dar'st acknowledg it , i will make it 
 my quarrel . 
 william . here 's my glove ; give me anoth of thine . 
 king henri . there . 
 william . thi will i also wear in my cap ; if ever thou come to me 
 and say , after to-morrow , 'thi is my glove , ' by thi hand i will 
 take thee a box on the ear . 
 king henri . if ever i live to see it , i will challeng it . 
 william . thou dar'st as well be hang 'd . 
 king henri . well , i will do it , though i take thee in the king 's 
 compani . 
 william . keep thi word . fare thee well . 
 bate . be friend , you english fool , be friend ; we have 
 french quarrel enow , if you could tell how to reckon . 
 king henri . inde , the french may lay twenti french crown to one 
 they will beat us , for they bear them on their shoulder ; but it 
 is no english treason to cut french crown , and to-morrow the 
 king himself will be a clipper . 
 exeunt soldier 
 upon the king ! let us our live , our soul , 
 our debt , our care wive , 
 our children , and our sin , lay on the king ! 
 we must bear all . o hard condit , 
 twin-born with great , subject to the breath 
 of everi fool , whose sens no more can feel 
 but hi own wring ! what infinit heart 's eas 
 must king neglect that privat men enjoy ! 
 and what have king that privat have not too , 
 save ceremony- save gener ceremoni ? 
 and what art thou , thou idol ceremoni ? 
 what kind of god art thou , that suffer'st more 
 of mortal grief than do thi worshipp ? 
 what are thi rent ? what are thi comings-in ? 
 o ceremoni , show me but thi worth ! 
 what is thi soul of ador ? 
 art thou aught els but place , degre , and form , 
 creat awe and fear in other men ? 
 wherein thou art less happi be fear 'd 
 than they in fear . 
 what drink'st thou oft , instead of homag sweet , 
 but poison 'd flatteri ? o , be sick , great great , 
 and bid thi ceremoni give thee cure ! 
 think thou the fieri fever will go out 
 with titl blown from adul ? 
 will it give place to flexur and low bend ? 
 canst thou , when thou command'st the beggar 's knee , 
 command the health of it ? no , thou proud dream , 
 that play'st so subtli with a king 's repos . 
 i am a king that find thee ; and i know 
 't is not the balm , the sceptr , and the ball , 
 the sword , the mace , the crown imperi , 
 the intertissu robe of gold and pearl , 
 the farc tide run fore the king , 
 the throne he sit on , nor the tide of pomp 
 that beat upon the high shore of thi world- 
 no , not all these , thrice gorgeou ceremoni , 
 not all these , laid in bed majest , 
 can sleep so soundli as the wretch slave 
 who , with a bodi fill 'd and vacant mind , 
 get him to rest , cramm 'd with distress bread ; 
 never see horrid night , the child of hell ; 
 but , like a lackey , from the rise to set 
 sweat in the eye of pheebu , and all night 
 sleep in elysium ; next day , after dawn , 
 doth rise and help hyperion to hi hors ; 
 and follow so the ever-run year 
 with profit labour , to hi grave . 
 and but for ceremoni , such a wretch , 
 wind up day with toil and night with sleep , 
 had the fore-hand and vantag of a king . 
 the slave , a member of the countri 's peac , 
 enjoy it ; but in gross brain littl wot 
 what watch the king keep to maintain the peac 
 whose hour the peasant best advantag . 
 
 enter erpingham 
 
 erpingham . my lord , your nobl , jealou of your absenc , 
 seek through your camp to find you . 
 king . good old knight , 
 collect them all togeth at my tent : 
 i 'll be befor thee . 
 erpingham . i shall do't , my lord . exit 
 king . o god of battl , steel my soldier ' heart , 
 possess them not with fear ! take from them now 
 the sens of reck'n , if th ' oppos number 
 pluck their heart from them ! not to-day , o lord , 
 o , not to-day , think not upon the fault 
 my father made in compass the crown ! 
 i richard 's bodi have inter new , 
 and on it have bestow more contrit tear 
 than from it issu forc drop of blood ; 
 five hundr poor i have in yearli pay , 
 who twice a day their wither 'd hand hold up 
 toward heaven , to pardon blood ; and i have built 
 two chantri , where the sad and solemn priest 
 sing still for richard 's soul . more will i do ; 
 though all that i can do is noth worth , 
 sinc that my penit come after all , 
 implor pardon . 
 
 enter gloucest 
 
 gloucest . my lieg ! 
 king henri . my brother gloucest 's voic ? ay ; 
 i know thi errand , i will go with thee ; 
 the day , my friend , and all thing , stay for me . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the french camp 
 
 enter the dauphin , orlean , rambur , and other 
 
 orlean . the sun doth gild our armour ; up , my lord ! 
 dauphin . montez a cheval ! my hors ! varlet , laquai ! ha ! 
 orlean . o brave spirit ! 
 dauphin . via ! le eaux et la terre- 
 orlean . rien pui ? l'air et le feu . 
 dauphin . ciel ! cousin orlean . 
 
 enter constabl 
 
 now , my lord constabl ! 
 constabl . hark how our steed for present servic neigh ! 
 dauphin . mount them , and make incis in their hide , 
 that their hot blood may spin in english eye , 
 and dout them with superflu courag , ha ! 
 rambur . what , will you have them weep our hors ' blood ? 
 how shall we then behold their natur tear ? 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . the english are embattl 'd , you french peer . 
 constabl . to hors , you gallant princ ! straight to hors ! 
 do but behold yon poor and starv band , 
 and your fair show shall suck away their soul , 
 leav them but the shale and husk of men . 
 there is not work enough for all our hand ; 
 scarc blood enough in all their sickli vein 
 to give each nake curtle-ax a stain 
 that our french gallant shall to-day draw out , 
 and sheath for lack of sport . let us but blow on them , 
 the vapour of our valour will o'erturn them . 
 't is posit 'gainst all except , lord , 
 that our superflu lackey and our peasants- 
 who in unnecessari action swarm 
 about our squar of battle- were enow 
 to purg thi field of , such a hild foe ; 
 though we upon thi mountain 's basi by 
 took stand for idl speculation- 
 but that our honour must not . what 's to say ? 
 a veri littl littl let us do , 
 and all is done . then let the trumpet sound 
 the tucket sonanc and the note to mount ; 
 for our approach shall so much dare the field 
 that england shall couch down in fear and yield . 
 
 enter grandpr 
 
 grandpr . whi do you stay so long , my lord of franc ? 
 yond island carrion , desper of their bone , 
 ill-favouredli becom the morn field ; 
 their rag curtain poorli are let loos , 
 and our air shake them pass scorn ; 
 big mar seem bankrupt in their beggar 'd host , 
 and faintli through a rusti beaver peep . 
 the horsemen sit like fix candlestick 
 with torch-stav in their hand ; and their poor jade 
 lob down their head , drop the hide and hip , 
 the gum down-rop from their pale-dead eye , 
 and in their pale dull mouth the gimmal 'd bit 
 lie foul with chaw 'd grass , still and motionless ; 
 and their executor , the knavish crow , 
 fli o'er them , all impati for their hour . 
 descript can not suit itself in word 
 to demonstr the life of such a battl 
 in life so lifeless as it show itself . 
 constabl . they have said their prayer and they stay for death . 
 dauphin . shall we go send them dinner and fresh suit , 
 and give their fast hors provend , 
 and after fight with them ? 
 constabl . i stay but for my guidon . to the field ! 
 i will the banner from a trumpet take , 
 and use it for my hast . come , come , away ! 
 the sun is high , and we outwear the day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the english camp 
 
 enter gloucest , bedford , exet , erpingham , with all hi host ; 
 salisburi and westmoreland 
 
 gloucest . where is the king ? 
 bedford . the king himself is rode to view their battl . 
 westmoreland . of fight men they have full three-scor thousand . 
 exet . there 's five to one ; besid , they all are fresh . 
 salisburi . god 's arm strike with us ! 't is a fear odd . 
 god bye you , princ all ; i 'll to my charg . 
 if we no more meet till we meet in heaven , 
 then joy , my nobl lord of bedford , 
 my dear lord gloucest , and my good lord exet , 
 and my kind kinsman- warrior all , adieu ! 
 bedford . farewel , good salisburi ; and good luck go with thee ! 
 exet . farewel , kind lord . fight valiantli to-day ; 
 and yet i do thee wrong to mind thee of it , 
 for thou art fram 'd of the firm truth of valour . 
 exit salisburi 
 bedford . he is as full of valour as of kind ; 
 princ in both . 
 
 enter the king 
 
 westmoreland . o that we now had here 
 but one ten thousand of those men in england 
 that do no work to-day ! 
 king . what 's he that wish so ? 
 my cousin westmoreland ? no , my fair cousin ; 
 if we are mark 'd to die , we are enow 
 to do our countri loss ; and if to live , 
 the fewer men , the greater share of honour . 
 god 's will ! i pray thee , wish not one man more . 
 by jove , i am not covet for gold , 
 nor care i who doth feed upon my cost ; 
 it yearn me not if men my garment wear ; 
 such outward thing dwell not in my desir . 
 but if it be a sin to covet honour , 
 i am the most offend soul aliv . 
 no , faith , my coz , wish not a man from england . 
 god 's peac ! i would not lose so great an honour 
 as one man more methink would share from me 
 for the best hope i have . o , do not wish one more ! 
 rather proclaim it , westmoreland , through my host , 
 that he which hath no stomach to thi fight , 
 let him depart ; hi passport shall be made , 
 and crown for convoy put into hi purs ; 
 we would not die in that man 's compani 
 that fear hi fellowship to die with us . 
 thi day is call 'd the feast of crispian . 
 he that outliv thi day , and come safe home , 
 will stand a tip-to when thi day is nam 'd , 
 and rous him at the name of crispian . 
 he that shall live thi day , and see old age , 
 will yearli on the vigil feast hi neighbour , 
 and say 'to-morrow is saint crispian . ' 
 then will he strip hi sleev and show hi scar , 
 and say 'these wound i had on crispian 's day . ' 
 old men forget ; yet all shall be forgot , 
 but he 'll rememb , with advantag , 
 what feat he did that day . then shall our name , 
 familiar in hi mouth as household words- 
 harri the king , bedford and exet , 
 warwick and talbot , salisburi and gloucester- 
 be in their flow cup freshli rememb'r . 
 thi stori shall the good man teach hi son ; 
 and crispin crispian shall ne'er go by , 
 from thi day to the end of the world , 
 but we in it shall be remembered- 
 we few , we happi few , we band of brother ; 
 for he to-day that shed hi blood with me 
 shall be my brother ; be he ne'er so vile , 
 thi day shall gentl hi condit ; 
 and gentlemen in england now-a-b 
 shall think themselv accur 'd they were not here , 
 and hold their manhood cheap while ani speak 
 that fought with us upon saint crispin 's day . 
 
 re-ent salisburi 
 
 salisburi . my sovereign lord , bestow yourself with speed : 
 the french are brave in their battl set , 
 and will with all expedi charg on us . 
 king henri . all thing are readi , if our mind be so . 
 westmoreland . perish the man whose mind is backward now ! 
 king henri . thou dost not wish more help from england , coz ? 
 westmoreland . god 's will , my lieg ! would you and i alon , 
 without more help , could fight thi royal battl ! 
 king henri . whi , now thou hast unwish 'd five thousand men ; 
 which like me better than to wish us one . 
 you know your place . god be with you all ! 
 
 tucket . enter montjoy 
 
 montjoy . onc more i come to know of thee , king harri , 
 if for thi ransom thou wilt now compound , 
 befor thi most assur overthrow ; 
 for certainli thou art so near the gulf 
 thou need must be englut . besid , in merci , 
 the constabl desir thee thou wilt mind 
 thi follow of repent , that their soul 
 may make a peac and a sweet retir 
 from off these field , where , wretch , their poor bodi 
 must lie and fester . 
 king henri . who hath sent thee now ? 
 montjoy . the constabl of franc . 
 king henri . i pray thee bear my former answer back : 
 bid them achiev me , and then sell my bone . 
 good god ! whi should they mock poor fellow thu ? 
 the man that onc did sell the lion 's skin 
 while the beast liv 'd wa kill 'd with hunt him . 
 a mani of our bodi shall no doubt 
 find nativ grave ; upon the which , i trust , 
 shall wit live in brass of thi day 's work . 
 and those that leav their valiant bone in franc , 
 die like men , though buri in your dunghil , 
 they shall be fam 'd ; for there the sun shall greet them 
 and draw their honour reek up to heaven , 
 leav their earthli part to choke your clime , 
 the smell whereof shall breed a plagu in franc . 
 mark then abound valour in our english , 
 that , be dead , like to the bullet 's graze 
 break out into a second cours of mischief , 
 kill in relaps of mortal . 
 let me speak proudli : tell the constabl 
 we are but warrior for the working-day ; 
 our gay and our gilt are all besmirch 'd 
 with raini march in the pain field ; 
 there 's not a piec of feather in our host- 
 good argument , i hope , we will not fly- 
 and time hath worn us into slovenri . 
 but , by the mass , our heart are in the trim ; 
 and my poor soldier tell me yet ere night 
 they 'll be in fresher robe , or they will pluck 
 the gay new coat o'er the french soldier ' head 
 and turn them out of servic . if they do this- 
 as , if god pleas , they shall- my ransom then 
 will soon be levi . herald , save thou thi labour ; 
 come thou no more for ransom , gentl herald ; 
 they shall have none , i swear , but these my joint ; 
 which if they have , as i will leav 'em them , 
 shall yield them littl , tell the constabl . 
 montjoy . i shall , king harri . and so fare thee well : 
 thou never shalt hear herald ani more . exit 
 king henri . i fear thou wilt onc more come again for a ransom . 
 
 enter the duke of york 
 
 york . my lord , most humbl on my knee i beg 
 the lead of the vaward . 
 king henri . take it , brave york . now , soldier , march away ; 
 and how thou pleasest , god , dispos the day ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 the field of battl 
 
 alarum . excurs . enter french soldier , pistol , and boy 
 
 pistol . yield , cur ! 
 french soldier . je pens que vou ete le gentilhomm de bonn 
 qualit . 
 pistol . caliti ! calen o custur me ! art thou a gentleman ? 
 what is thi name ? discuss . 
 french soldier . o seigneur dieu ! 
 pistol . o , signieur dew should be a gentleman . 
 perpend my word , o signieur dew , and mark : 
 o signieur dew , thou diest on point of fox , 
 except , o signieur , thou do give to me 
 egregi ransom . 
 french soldier . o , prenez misericord ; ayez piti de moi ! 
 pistol . moy shall not serv ; i will have forti moy ; 
 or i will fetch thi rim out at thi throat 
 in drop of crimson blood . 
 french soldier . est-il imposs d'echapp la forc de ton bra ? 
 pistol . brass , cur ? 
 thou damn and luxuri mountain-goat , 
 offer'st me brass ? 
 french soldier . o , pardonnez-moi ! 
 pistol . say'st thou me so ? is that a ton of moy ? 
 come hither , boy ; ask me thi slave in french 
 what is hi name . 
 boy . ecoutez : comment etes-v appel ? 
 french soldier . monsieur le fer . 
 boy . he say hi name is master fer . 
 pistol . master fer ! i 'll fer him , and firk him , and ferret him- 
 discuss the same in french unto him . 
 boy . i do not know the french for fer , and ferret , and firk . 
 pistol . bid him prepar ; for i will cut hi throat . 
 french soldier . que dit-il , monsieur ? 
 boy . il me command a vou dire que vou fait vou pret ; car ce 
 soldat ici est dispos tout a cett heur de couper votr gorg . 
 pistol . owi , cuppel gorg , permafoy ! 
 peasant , unless thou give me crown , brave crown ; 
 or mangl shalt thou be by thi my sword . 
 french soldier . o , je vou suppli , pour l'amour de dieu , me 
 pardonn ! je sui gentilhomm de bonn maison . gardez ma vie , et 
 je vou donnerai deux cent ecu . 
 pistol . what are hi word ? 
 boy . he pray you to save hi life ; he is a gentleman of a good 
 hous , and for hi ransom he will give you two hundr crown . 
 pistol . tell him my furi shall abat , and i 
 the crown will take . 
 french soldier . petit monsieur , que dit-il ? 
 boy . encor qu'il est contr son jurement de pardonn aucun 
 prisonni , neamnoin , pour le ecu que vou l'avez promi , il 
 est content a vou donner la libert , le franchis . 
 french soldier . sur me genoux je vou donn mill remercimen ; et 
 je m'estim heureux que je sui tomb entr le main d'un 
 chevali , je pens , le plu brave , vaillant , et tre distingu 
 seigneur d'angleterr . 
 pistol . expound unto me , boy . 
 boy . he give you , upon hi knee , a thousand thank ; and he 
 esteem himself happi that he hath fall'n into the hand of one- 
 as he thinks- the most brave , valor , and thrice-worthi 
 signieur of england . 
 pistol . as i suck blood , i will some merci show . 
 follow me . exit 
 boy . suivez-v le grand capitain . exit french soldier 
 i did never know so full a voic issu from so empti a heart ; but 
 the say is true- the empti vessel make the greatest sound . 
 bardolph and nym had ten time more valour than thi roar 
 devil i ' th ' old play , that everi one may pare hi nail with a 
 wooden dagger ; and they are both hang 'd ; and so would thi be , if 
 he durst steal anyth adventur . i must stay with the 
 lackey , with the luggag of our camp . the french might have a 
 good prey of us , if he knew of it ; for there is none to guard it 
 but boy . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 anoth part of the field of battl 
 
 enter constabl , orlean , bourbon , dauphin , and rambur 
 
 constabl . o diabl ! 
 orlean . o seigneur ! le jour est perdu , tout est perdu ! 
 dauphin . mort dieu , ma vie ! all is confound , all ! 
 reproach and everlast shame 
 sit mock in our plume . [ a short alarum ] 
 o mechant fortun ! do not run away . 
 constabl . whi , an our rank are broke . 
 dauphin . o perdur shame ! let 's stab ourselv . 
 be these the wretch that we play 'd at dice for ? 
 orlean . is thi the king we sent to for hi ransom ? 
 bourbon . shame , and etern shame , noth but shame ! 
 let us die in honour : onc more back again ; 
 and he that will not follow bourbon now , 
 let him go henc and , with hi cap in hand 
 like a base pander , hold the chamber-door 
 whilst by a slave , no gender than my dog , 
 hi fairest daughter is contamin . 
 constabl . disord , that hath spoil 'd us , friend us now ! 
 let us on heap go offer up our live . 
 orlean . we are enow yet live in the field 
 to smother up the english in our throng , 
 if ani order might be thought upon . 
 bourbon . the devil take order now ! i 'll to the throng . 
 let life be short , els shame will be too long . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 anoth part of the field 
 
 alarum . enter the king and hi train , with prison ; exet , and other 
 
 king henri . well have we done , thrice-vali countrymen ; 
 but all 's not done- yet keep the french the field . 
 exet . the duke of york commend him to your majesti . 
 king henri . live he , good uncl ? thrice within thi hour 
 i saw him down ; thrice up again , and fight ; 
 from helmet to the spur all blood he wa . 
 exet . in which array , brave soldier , doth he lie 
 lard the plain ; and by hi bloodi side , 
 yoke-fellow to hi honour-ow wound , 
 the nobl earl of suffolk also lie . 
 suffolk first die ; and york , all haggl over , 
 come to him , where in gore he lay insteep , 
 and take him by the beard , kiss the gash 
 that bloodili did yawn upon hi face , 
 he cri aloud 'tarri , my cousin suffolk . 
 my soul shall thine keep compani to heaven ; 
 tarri , sweet soul , for mine , then fli abreast ; 
 as in thi gloriou and well-foughten field 
 we kept togeth in our chivalri . ' 
 upon these word i came and cheer 'd him up ; 
 he smil 'd me in the face , raught me hi hand , 
 and , with a feebl grip , say 'dear my lord , 
 commend my servic to my sovereign . ' 
 so did he turn , and over suffolk 's neck 
 he threw hi wound arm and kiss 'd hi lip ; 
 and so , espou 'd to death , with blood he seal 'd 
 a testament of noble-end love . 
 the pretti and sweet manner of it forc 'd 
 those water from me which i would have stopp 'd ; 
 but i had not so much of man in me , 
 and all my mother came into mine eye 
 and gave me up to tear . 
 king henri . i blame you not ; 
 for , hear thi , i must perforc compound 
 with mist eye , or they will issu too . [ alarum ] 
 but hark ! what new alarum is thi same ? 
 the french have reinforc 'd their scatter 'd men . 
 then everi soldier kill hi prison ; 
 give the word through . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 anoth part of the field 
 
 enter fluellen and gower 
 
 fluellen . kill the poy and the luggag ! 't is expressli against the 
 law of arm ; 't is as arrant a piec of knaveri , mark you now , as 
 can be offert ; in your conscienc , now , is it not ? 
 gower . 't is certain there 's not a boy left aliv ; and the cowardli 
 rascal that ran from the battl ha ' done thi slaughter ; 
 besid , they have burn and carri away all that wa in the 
 king 's tent ; wherefor the king most worthili hath cau 'd everi 
 soldier to cut hi prison 's throat . o , 't is a gallant king ! 
 fluellen . ay , he wa porn at monmouth , captain gower . what call you 
 the town 's name where alexand the pig wa born ? 
 gower . alexand the great . 
 fluellen . whi , i pray you , is not 'pig ' great ? the pig , or great , 
 or the mighti , or the huge , or the magnanim , are all one 
 reckon , save the phrase is a littl variat . 
 gower . i think alexand the great wa born in macedon ; hi father 
 wa call philip of macedon , as i take it . 
 fluellen . i think it is in macedon where alexand is porn . i tell 
 you , captain , if you look in the map of the 'orld , i warrant you 
 sall find , in the comparison between macedon and monmouth , that 
 the situat , look you , is both alik . there is a river in 
 macedon ; and there is also moreov a river at monmouth ; it is 
 call 'd wye at monmouth , but it is out of my prain what is the 
 name of the other river ; but 't is all one , 't is alik as my 
 finger is to my finger , and there is salmon in both . if you 
 mark alexand 's life well , harri of monmouth 's life is come 
 after it indiffer well ; for there is figur in all thing . 
 alexander- god know , and you know- in hi rage , and hi furi , 
 and hi wrath , and hi choler , and hi mood , and hi 
 displeasur , and hi indign , and also be a littl 
 intox in hi prain , did , in hi ale and hi anger , look 
 you , kill hi best friend , cleitu . 
 gower . our king is not like him in that : he never kill 'd ani of hi 
 friend . 
 fluellen . it is not well done , mark you now , to take the tale out 
 of my mouth ere it is made and finish . i speak but in the 
 figur and comparison of it ; as alexand kill 'd hi friend 
 cleitu , be in hi ale and hi cup , so also harri monmouth , 
 be in hi right wit and hi good judgment , turn 'd away the 
 fat knight with the great belli doublet ; he wa full of jest , 
 and gipe , and knaveri , and mock ; i have forgot hi name . 
 gower . sir john falstaff . 
 fluellen . that is he . i 'll tell you there is good men porn at 
 monmouth . 
 gower . here come hi majesti . 
 
 alarum . enter the king , warwick , gloucest , 
 exet , and other , with prison . flourish 
 
 king henri . i wa not angri sinc i came to franc 
 until thi instant . take a trumpet , herald , 
 ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill ; 
 if they will fight with us , bid them come down 
 or void the field ; they do offend our sight . 
 if they 'll do neither , we will come to them 
 and make them skirr away as swift as stone 
 enforc from the old assyrian sling ; 
 besid , we 'll cut the throat of those we have , 
 and not a man of them that we shall take 
 shall tast our merci . go and tell them so . 
 
 enter montjoy 
 
 exet . here come the herald of the french , my lieg . 
 gloucest . hi eye are humbler than they us 'd to be . 
 king henri . how now ! what mean thi , herald ? know'st thou not 
 that i have fin 'd these bone of mine for ransom ? 
 com'st thou again for ransom ? 
 montjoy . no , great king ; 
 i come to thee for charit licenc , 
 that we may wander o'er thi bloodi field 
 to book our dead , and then to buri them ; 
 to sort our nobl from our common men ; 
 for mani of our princes- woe the while ! - 
 lie drown 'd and soak 'd in mercenari blood ; 
 so do our vulgar drench their peasant limb 
 in blood of princ ; and their wound steed 
 fret fetlock deep in gore , and with wild rage 
 yerk out their arm heel at their dead master , 
 kill them twice . o , give us leav , great king , 
 to view the field in safeti , and dispos 
 of their dead bodi ! 
 king henri . i tell thee truli , herald , 
 i know not if the day be our or no ; 
 for yet a mani of your horsemen peer 
 and gallop o'er the field . 
 montjoy . the day is your . 
 king henri . prais be god , and not our strength , for it ! 
 what is thi castl call 'd that stand hard by ? 
 montjoy . they call it agincourt . 
 king henri . then call we thi the field of agincourt , 
 fought on the day of crispin crispianu . 
 fluellen . your grandfath of famou memori , a n't pleas your 
 majesti , and your great-uncl edward the plack princ of wale , 
 as i have read in the chronicl , fought a most prave pattl here 
 in franc . 
 king henri . they did , fluellen . 
 fluellen . your majesti say veri true ; if your majesti is 
 rememb'r of it , the welshmen did good servic in garden where 
 leek did grow , wear leek in their monmouth cap ; which your 
 majesti know to thi hour is an honour badg of the servic ; 
 and i do believ your majesti take no scorn to wear the leek 
 upon saint tavi 's day . 
 king henri . i wear it for a memor honour ; 
 for i am welsh , you know , good countryman . 
 fluellen . all the water in wye can not wash your majesti 's welsh 
 plood out of your podi , i can tell you that . got pless it and 
 preserv it as long as it pleas hi grace and hi majesti too ! 
 king henri . thank , good my countryman . 
 fluellen . by jeshu , i am your majesti 's countryman , care not who 
 know it ; i will confess it to all the 'orld : i need not be 
 asham 'd of your majesti , prais be got , so long as your majesti 
 is an honest man . 
 
 enter william 
 
 king henri . god keep me so ! our herald go with him : 
 bring me just notic of the number dead 
 on both our part . call yonder fellow hither . 
 exeunt herald with montjoy 
 exet . soldier , you must come to the king . 
 king henri . soldier , whi wear'st thou that glove in thi cap ? 
 william . a n't pleas your majesti , 't is the gage of one that i 
 should fight withal , if he be aliv . 
 king henri . an englishman ? 
 william . a n't pleas your majesti , a rascal that swagger 'd with me 
 last night ; who , if ' a live and ever dare to challeng thi 
 glove , i have sworn to take him a box o ' th ' ear ; or if i can see 
 my glove in hi cap- which he swore , as he wa a soldier , he 
 would wear if alive- i will strike it out soundli . 
 king henri . what think you , captain fluellen , is it fit thi 
 soldier keep hi oath ? 
 fluellen . he is a craven and a villain els , a n't pleas your 
 majesti , in my conscienc . 
 king henri . it may be hi enemi is a gentlemen of great sort , quit 
 from the answer of hi degre . 
 fluellen . though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is , as 
 lucifi and belzebub himself , it is necessari , look your grace , 
 that he keep hi vow and hi oath ; if he be perjur 'd , see you 
 now , hi reput is as arrant a villain and a jacksauc as 
 ever hi black shoe trod upon god 's ground and hi earth , in my 
 conscienc , la . 
 king henri . then keep thi vow , sirrah , when thou meet'st the 
 fellow . 
 william . so i will , my lieg , as i live . 
 king henri . who serv'st thou under ? 
 william . under captain gower , my lieg . 
 fluellen . gower is a good captain , and is good knowledg and 
 literatur in the war . 
 king henri . call him hither to me , soldier . 
 william . i will , my lieg . exit 
 king henri . here , fluellen ; wear thou thi favour for me , and stick 
 it in thi cap ; when alencon and myself were down togeth , i 
 pluck 'd thi glove from hi helm . if ani man challeng thi , he 
 is a friend to alencon and an enemi to our person ; if thou 
 encount ani such , apprehend him , an thou dost me love . 
 fluellen . your grace doe me as great honour as can be desir 'd in 
 the heart of hi subject . i would fain see the man that ha but 
 two leg that shall find himself aggrief 'd at thi glove , that is 
 all ; but i would fain see it onc , an pleas god of hi grace 
 that i might see . 
 king henri . know'st thou gower ? 
 fluellen . he is my dear friend , an pleas you . 
 king henri . pray thee , go seek him , and bring him to my tent . 
 fluellen . i will fetch him . exit 
 king henri . my lord of warwick and my brother gloucest , 
 follow fluellen close at the heel ; 
 the glove which i have given him for a favour 
 may hapli purchas him a box o ' th ' ear . 
 it is the soldier 's : i , by bargain , should 
 wear it myself . follow , good cousin warwick ; 
 if that the soldier strike him , as i judg 
 by hi blunt bear he will keep hi word , 
 some sudden mischief may aris of it ; 
 for i do know fluellen valiant , 
 and touch 'd with choler , hot as gunpowd , 
 and quickli will return an injuri ; 
 follow , and see there be no harm between them . 
 go you with me , uncl of exet . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene viii . 
 befor king henri 's pavilion 
 
 enter gower and william 
 
 william . i warrant it is to knight you , captain . 
 
 enter fluellen 
 
 fluellen . god 's will and hi pleasur , captain , i beseech you now , 
 come apac to the king : there is more good toward you 
 peradventur than is in your knowledg to dream of . 
 william . sir , know you thi glove ? 
 fluellen . know the glove ? i know the glove is a glove . 
 william . i know thi ; and thu i challeng it . [ strike him ] 
 fluellen . 'sblood , an arrant traitor as ani 's in the univers 
 world , or in franc , or in england ! 
 gower . how now , sir ! you villain ! 
 william . do you think i 'll be forsworn ? 
 fluellen . stand away , captain gower ; i will give treason hi 
 payment into plow , i warrant you . 
 william . i am no traitor . 
 fluellen . that 's a lie in thi throat . i charg you in hi majesti 's 
 name , apprehend him : he 's a friend of the duke alencon 's . 
 
 enter warwick and gloucest 
 
 warwick . how now ! how now ! what 's the matter ? 
 fluellen . my lord of warwick , here is- prais be god for it ! - a 
 most contagi treason come to light , look you , as you shall 
 desir in a summer 's day . here is hi majesti . 
 
 enter the king and exet 
 
 king henri . how now ! what 's the matter ? 
 fluellen . my lieg , here is a villain and a traitor , that , look 
 your grace , ha struck the glove which your majesti is take out 
 of the helmet of alencon . 
 william . my lieg , thi wa my glove : here is the fellow of it ; 
 and he that i gave it to in chang promi 'd to wear it in hi 
 cap ; i promi 'd to strike him if he did ; i met thi man with my 
 glove in hi cap , and i have been as good as my word . 
 fluellen . your majesti hear now , save your majesti 's manhood , 
 what an arrant , rascal , beggarli , lousi knave it is ; i hope 
 your majesti is pear me testimoni and wit , and will 
 avouch , that thi is the glove of alencon that your majesti 
 is give me ; in your conscienc , now . 
 king henri . give me thi glove , soldier ; look , here is the fellow of 
 it . 
 't wa i , inde , thou promised'st to strike , 
 and thou hast given me most bitter term . 
 fluellen . an pleas your majesti , let hi neck answer for it , if 
 there is ani martial law in the world . 
 king henri . how canst thou make me satisfact ? 
 william . all offenc , my lord , come from the heart ; never came 
 ani from mine that might offend your majesti . 
 king henri . it wa ourself thou didst abus . 
 william . your majesti came not like yourself : you appear 'd to me 
 but as a common man ; wit the night , your garment , your 
 lowli ; and what your high suffer 'd under that shape i 
 beseech you take it for your own fault , and not mine ; for had you 
 been as i took you for , i made no offenc ; therefor , i beseech 
 your high pardon me . 
 king henri . here , uncl exet , fill thi glove with crown , 
 and give it to thi fellow . keep it , fellow ; 
 and wear it for an honour in thi cap 
 till i do challeng it . give him the crown ; 
 and , captain , you must need be friend with him . 
 fluellen . by thi day and thi light , the fellow ha mettl enough 
 in hi belli : hold , there is twelv penc for you ; and i pray you 
 to serv god , and keep you out of prawl , and prabbl , and 
 quarrel , and dissens , and , i warrant you , it is the better 
 for you . 
 william . i will none of your money . 
 fluellen . it is with a good will ; i can tell you it will serv you 
 to mend your shoe . come , wherefor should you be so pash ? 
 your shoe is not so good . 't is a good sill , i warrant you , or 
 i will chang it . 
 
 enter an english herald 
 
 king henri . now , herald , are the dead numb'r ? 
 herald . here is the number of the slaught'r french . 
 [ give a paper ] 
 king henri . what prison of good sort are taken , uncl ? 
 exet . charl duke of orlean , nephew to the king ; 
 john duke of bourbon , and lord bouciqualt ; 
 of other lord and baron , knight and squir , 
 full fifteen hundr , besid common men . 
 king henri . thi note doth tell me of ten thousand french 
 that in the field lie slain ; of princ in thi number , 
 and nobl bear banner , there lie dead 
 one hundr twenty-six ; ad to these , 
 of knight , esquir , and gallant gentlemen , 
 eight thousand and four hundr ; of the which 
 five hundr were but yesterday dubb 'd knight . 
 so that , in these ten thousand they have lost , 
 there are but sixteen hundr mercenari ; 
 the rest are princ , baron , lord , knight , squir , 
 and gentlemen of blood and qualiti . 
 the name of those their nobl that lie dead : 
 charl delabreth , high constabl of franc ; 
 jaqu of chatillon , admir of franc ; 
 the master of the cross-bow , lord rambur ; 
 great master of franc , the brave sir guichard dolphin ; 
 john duke of alencon ; antoni duke of brabant , 
 the brother to the duke of burgundi ; 
 and edward duke of bar . of lusti earl , 
 grandpr and roussi , fauconbridg and foix , 
 beaumont and marl , vaudemont and lestrak . 
 here wa a royal fellowship of death ! 
 where is the number of our english dead ? 
 [ herald present anoth paper ] 
 edward the duke of york , the earl of suffolk , 
 sir richard kike , davi gam , esquir ; 
 none els of name ; and of all other men 
 but five and twenti . o god , thi arm wa here ! 
 and not to us , but to thi arm alon , 
 ascrib we all . when , without stratagem , 
 but in plain shock and even play of battl , 
 wa ever known so great and littl lo 
 on one part and on th ' other ? take it , god , 
 for it is none but thine . 
 exet . 't is wonder ! 
 king henri . come , go we in process to the villag ; 
 and be it death proclaim through our host 
 to boast of thi or take that prais from god 
 which is hi onli . 
 fluellen . is it not law , an pleas your majesti , to tell how 
 mani is kill 'd ? 
 king henri . ye , captain ; but with thi acknowledg , 
 that god fought for us . 
 fluellen . ye , my conscienc , he did us great good . 
 king henri . do we all holi rite : 
 let there be sung 'non nobi ' and 'te deum ' ; 
 the dead with chariti enclo 'd in clay- 
 and then to calai ; and to england then ; 
 where ne'er from franc arriv 'd more happi men . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. prologu . 
 
 enter choru 
 
 choru . vouchsaf to those that have not read the stori 
 that i may prompt them ; and of such as have , 
 i humbl pray them to admit th ' excus 
 of time , of number , and due cours of thing , 
 which can not in their huge and proper life 
 be here present . now we bear the king 
 toward calai . grant him there . there seen , 
 heav him away upon your wing thought 
 athwart the sea . behold , the english beach 
 pale in the flood with men , with wive , and boy , 
 whose shout and clap out-voic the deep-mouth 'd sea , 
 which , like a mighti whiffler , fore the king 
 seem to prepar hi way . so let him land , 
 and solemnli see him set on to london . 
 so swift a pace hath thought that even now 
 you may imagin him upon blackheath ; 
 where that hi lord desir him to have born 
 hi bruis helmet and hi bend sword 
 befor him through the citi . he forbid it , 
 be free from vain and self-glori pride ; 
 give full trophi , signal , and ostent , 
 quit from himself to god . but now behold 
 in the quick forg and working-hous of thought , 
 how london doth pour out her citizen ! 
 the mayor and all hi brethren in best sort- 
 like to the senat of th ' antiqu rome , 
 with the plebeian swarm at their heels- 
 go forth and fetch their conqu'r caesar in ; 
 as , by a lower but love likelihood , 
 were now the gener of our graciou empress- 
 as in good time he may- from ireland come , 
 bring rebellion broach on hi sword , 
 how mani would the peac citi quit 
 to welcom him ! much more , and much more caus , 
 did they thi harri . now in london place him- 
 as yet the lament of the french 
 invit the king of england 's stay at home ; 
 the emperor 's come in behalf of franc 
 to order peac between them ; and omit 
 all the occurr , whatev chanc 'd , 
 till harri 's back-return again to franc . 
 there must we bring him ; and myself have play 'd 
 the interim , by rememb'r you 't is past . 
 then brook abridg ; and your eye advanc , 
 after your thought , straight back again to franc . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene i . 
 franc . the english camp 
 
 enter fluellen and gower 
 
 gower . nay , that 's right ; but whi wear you your leek to-day ? saint 
 davi 's day is past . 
 fluellen . there is occas and caus whi and wherefor in all 
 thing . i will tell you , ass my friend , captain gower : the 
 rascal , scald , beggarli , lousi , prag knave , pistol- which 
 you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a 
 fellow , look you now , of no merits- he is come to me , and pring 
 me pread and salt yesterday , look you , and bid me eat my leek ; it 
 wa in a place where i could not breed no contendon with him ; but 
 i will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till i see him onc 
 again , and then i will tell him a littl piec of my desir . 
 
 enter pistol 
 
 gower . whi , here he come , swell like a turkey-cock . 
 fluellen . 't is no matter for hi swell nor hi turkey-cock . 
 god pless you , aunchient pistol ! you scurvi , lousi knave , god 
 pless you ! 
 pistol . ha ! art thou bedlam ? dost thou thirst , base troyan , 
 to have me fold up parca 's fatal web ? 
 henc ! i am qualmish at the smell of leek . 
 fluellen . i peseech you heartili , scurvi , lousi knave , at my 
 desir , and my request , and my petit , to eat , look you , 
 thi leek ; becaus , look you , you do not love it , nor your 
 affect , and your appetit , and your digest , doe not 
 agre with it , i would desir you to eat it . 
 pistol . not for cadwallad and all hi goat . 
 fluellen . there is one goat for you . [ strike him ] will you be so 
 good , scald knave , as eat it ? 
 pistol . base troyan , thou shalt die . 
 fluellen . you say veri true , scald knave- when god 's will is . i 
 will desir you to live in the meantim , and eat your victual ; 
 come , there is sauc for it . [ strike him again ] you call 'd me 
 yesterday mountain-squir ; but i will make you to-day a squir of 
 low degre . i pray you fall to ; if you can mock a leek , you can 
 eat a leek . 
 gower . enough , captain , you have astonish 'd him . 
 fluellen . i say i will make him eat some part of my leek , or i will 
 peat hi pate four day . bite , i pray you , it is good for your 
 green wound and your ploodi coxcomb . 
 pistol . must i bite ? 
 fluellen . ye , certainli , and out of doubt , and out of question 
 too , and ambiguid . 
 pistol . by thi leek , i will most horribl revenge- i eat and eat , 
 i swear- 
 fluellen . eat , i pray you ; will you have some more sauc to your 
 leek ? there is not enough leek to swear by . 
 pistol . quiet thi cudgel : thou dost see i eat . 
 fluellen . much good do you , scald knave , heartili . nay , pray you 
 throw none away ; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb . when 
 you take occas to see leek hereaft , i pray you mock at 
 'em ; that is all . 
 pistol . good . 
 fluellen . ay , leek is good . hold you , there is a groat to heal 
 your pate . 
 pistol . me a groat ! 
 fluellen . ye , verili and in truth , you shall take it ; or i have 
 anoth leek in my pocket which you shall eat . 
 pistol . i take thi groat in earnest of reveng . 
 fluellen . if i owe you anyth i will pay you in cudgel ; you 
 shall be a woodmong , and buy noth of me but cudgel . god bye 
 you , and keep you , and heal your pate . 
 exit 
 pistol . all hell shall stir for thi . 
 gower . go , go : you are a couterfeit cowardli knave . will you mock 
 at an ancient tradit , begun upon an honour respect , and 
 worn as a memor trophi of predeceas valour , and dare not 
 avouch in your deed ani of your word ? i have seen you gleek 
 and gall at thi gentleman twice or thrice . you thought , 
 becaus he could not speak english in the nativ garb , he could 
 not therefor handl an english cudgel ; you find it otherwis , 
 and henceforth let a welsh correct teach you a good english 
 condit . fare ye well . exit 
 pistol . doth fortun play the huswif with me now ? 
 news have i that my nell is dead i ' th ' spital 
 of maladi of franc ; 
 and there my rendezv is quit cut off . 
 old i do wax ; and from my weari limb 
 honour is cudgel 'd . well , bawd i 'll turn , 
 and someth lean to cutpurs of quick hand . 
 to england will i steal , and there i 'll steal ; 
 and patch will i get unto these cudgel 'd scar , 
 and swear i got them in the gallia war . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 franc . the french king 's palac 
 
 enter at one door , king henri , exet , bedford , gloucest , warwick , 
 westmoreland , and other lord ; at anoth , the french king , queen isabel , 
 the princess katherin , alic , and other ladi ; the duke of burgundi , 
 and hi train 
 
 king henri . peac to thi meet , wherefor we are met ! 
 unto our brother franc , and to our sister , 
 health and fair time of day ; joy and good wish 
 to our most fair and princ cousin katherin . 
 and , as a branch and member of thi royalti , 
 by whom thi great assembl is contriv 'd , 
 we do salut you , duke of burgundi . 
 and , princ french , and peer , health to you all ! 
 french king . right joyou are we to behold your face , 
 most worthi brother england ; fairli met ! 
 so are you , princ english , everi one . 
 queen isabel . so happi be the issu , brother england , 
 of thi good day and of thi graciou meet 
 as we are now glad to behold your eyes- 
 your eye , which hitherto have home in them , 
 against the french that met them in their bent , 
 the fatal ball of murder basilisk ; 
 the venom of such look , we fairli hope , 
 have lost their qualiti ; and that thi day 
 shall chang all grief and quarrel into love . 
 king henri . to cri amen to that , thu we appear . 
 queen isabel . you english princ an , i do salut you . 
 burgundi . my duti to you both , on equal love , 
 great king of franc and england ! that i have labour 'd 
 with all my wit , my pain , and strong endeavour , 
 to bring your most imperi majesti 
 unto thi bar and royal interview , 
 your mighti on both part best can wit . 
 sinc then my offic hath so far prevail 'd 
 that face to face and royal eye to eye 
 you have congreet , let it not disgrac me 
 if i demand , befor thi royal view , 
 what rub or what impedi there is 
 whi that the nake , poor , and mangl peac , 
 dear nurs of art , plenti , and joy birth , 
 should not in thi best garden of the world , 
 our fertil franc , put up her love visag ? 
 ala , she hath from franc too long been cha 'd ! 
 and all her husbandri doth lie on heap , 
 corrupt in it own fertil . 
 her vine , the merri cheerer of the heart , 
 unprun die ; her hedg even-pleach 'd , 
 like prison wildli overgrown with hair , 
 put forth disord 'd twig ; her fallow lea 
 the darnel , hemlock , and rank fumitori , 
 doth root upon , while that the coulter rust 
 that should deracin such savageri ; 
 the even mead , that erst brought sweetli forth 
 the freckl cowslip , burnet , and green clover , 
 want the scyth , all uncorrect , rank , 
 conceiv by idl , and noth teem 
 but hate dock , rough thistl , kecksi , bur , 
 lose both beauti and util . 
 and as our vineyard , fallow , mead , and hedg , 
 defect in their natur , grow to wild ; 
 even so our hous and ourselv and children 
 have lost , or do not learn for want of time , 
 the scienc that should becom our countri ; 
 but grow , like savages- as soldier will , 
 that noth do but medit on blood- 
 to swear and stern look , diffu 'd attir , 
 and everyth that seem unnatur . 
 which to reduc into our former favout 
 you are assembl ; and my speech entreat 
 that i may know the let whi gentl peac 
 should not expel these inconveni 
 and bless us with her former qualiti . 
 king henri . if , duke of burgundi , you would the peac 
 whose want give growth to th ' imperfect 
 which you have cite , you must buy that peac 
 with full accord to all our just demand ; 
 whose tenour and particular effect 
 you have , enschedul 'd briefli , in your hand . 
 burgundi . the king hath heard them ; to the which as yet 
 there is no answer made . 
 king henri . well then , the peac , 
 which you befor so urg 'd , lie in hi answer . 
 french king . i have but with a cursorari eye 
 o'erglanc the articl ; pleaseth your grace 
 to appoint some of your council present 
 to sit with us onc more , with better heed 
 to re-survey them , we will suddenli 
 pass our accept and peremptori answer . 
 king henri . brother , we shall . go , uncl exet , 
 and brother clarenc , and you , brother gloucest , 
 warwick , and huntington , go with the king ; 
 and take with you free power to ratifi , 
 augment , or alter , as your wisdom best 
 shall see advantag for our digniti , 
 ani thing in or out of our demand ; 
 and we 'll consign thereto . will you , fair sister , 
 go with the princ or stay here with us ? 
 queen isabel . our graciou brother , i will go with them ; 
 hapli a woman 's voic may do some good , 
 when articl too nice urg 'd be stood on . 
 king henri . yet leav our cousin katherin here with us ; 
 she is our capit demand , compri 'd 
 within the fore-rank of our articl . 
 queen isabel . she hath good leav . 
 exeunt all but the king , katherin , and alic 
 king henri . fair katherin , and most fair , 
 will you vouchsaf to teach a soldier term 
 such as will enter at a ladi 's ear , 
 and plead hi love-suit to her gentl heart ? 
 katherin . your majesti shall mock me ; i can not speak your england . 
 king henri . o fair katherin , if you will love me soundli with your 
 french heart , i will be glad to hear you confess it brokenli with 
 your english tongu . do you like me , kate ? 
 katherin . pardonnez-moi , i can not tell vat is like me . 
 king henri . an angel is like you , kate , and you are like an angel . 
 katherin . que dit-il ? que je sui semblabl a le ang ? 
 alic . oui , vraiment , sauf votr grace , ainsi dit-il . 
 king henri . i said so , dear katherin , and i must not blush to 
 affirm it . 
 katherin . o bon dieu ! le langu de homm sont plein de 
 tromperi . 
 king henri . what say she , fair one ? that the tongu of men are 
 full of deceit ? 
 alic . oui , dat de tongu of de man is be full of deceits- dat is 
 de princess . 
 king henri . the princess is the better english-woman . i ' faith , 
 kate , my woo is fit for thi understand : i am glad thou 
 canst speak no better english ; for if thou couldst , thou wouldst 
 find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think i had sold my 
 farm to buy my crown . i know no way to minc it in love , but 
 directli to say ' i love you . ' then , if you urg me farther than 
 to say 'do you in faith ? ' i wear out my suit . give me your 
 answer ; i ' faith , do ; and so clap hand and a bargain . how say 
 you , ladi ? 
 katherin . sauf votr honneur , me understand well . 
 king henri . marri , if you would put me to vers or to danc for 
 your sake , kate , whi you undid me ; for the one i have neither 
 word nor measur , and for the other i have no strength in 
 measur , yet a reason measur in strength . if i could win a 
 ladi at leap-frog , or by vault into my saddl with my armour 
 on my back , under the correct of brag be it spoken , i 
 should quickli leap into wife . or if i might buffet for my love , 
 or bound my hors for her favour , i could lay on like a butcher , 
 and sit like a jack-an-ap , never off . but , befor god , kate , i 
 can not look greenli , nor gasp out my cloquenc , nor i have no 
 cun in protest ; onli downright oath , which i never use 
 till urg 'd , nor never break for urg . if thou canst love a 
 fellow of thi temper , kate , whose face is not worth sunburn , 
 that never look in hi glass for love of anyth he see there , 
 let thine eye be thi cook . i speak to thee plain soldier . if thou 
 canst love me for thi , take me ; if not , to say to thee that i 
 shall die is true- but for thi love , by the lord , no ; yet i love 
 thee too . and while thou liv'st , dear kate , take a fellow of 
 plain and uncoin constanc ; for he perforc must do thee right , 
 becaus he hath not the gift to woo in other place ; for these 
 fellow of infinit tongu , that can rhyme themselv into 
 ladi ' favour , they do alway reason themselv out again . 
 what ! a speaker is but a prater : a rhyme is but a ballad . a good 
 leg will fall ; a straight back will stoop ; a black beard will 
 turn white ; a curl 'd pate will grow bald ; a fair face will 
 wither ; a full eye will wax hollow . but a good heart , kate , is 
 the sun and the moon ; or , rather , the sun , and not the moon- for 
 it shine bright and never chang , but keep hi cours truli . 
 if thou would have such a one , take me ; and take me , take a 
 soldier ; take a soldier , take a king . and what say'st thou , then , 
 to my love ? speak , my fair , and fairli , i pray thee . 
 katherin . is it possibl dat i sould love de enemi of franc ? 
 king henri . no , it is not possibl you should love the enemi of 
 franc , kate , but in love me you should love the friend of 
 franc ; for i love franc so well that i will not part with a 
 villag of it ; i will have it all mine . and , kate , when franc is 
 mine and i am your , then your is franc and you are mine . 
 katherin . i can not tell vat is dat . 
 king henri . no , kate ? i will tell thee in french , which i am sure 
 will hang upon my tongu like a new-marri wife about her 
 husband 's neck , hardli to be shook off . je quand sur le 
 possess de franc , et quand vou avez le possess de moi- 
 let me see , what then ? saint deni be my speed ! - donc votr est 
 franc et vou ete mienn . it is as easi for me , kate , to 
 conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more french : i shall 
 never move thee in french , unless it be to laugh at me . 
 katherin . sauf votr honneur , le francai que vou parlez , il est 
 meilleur que l'anglai lequel je parl . 
 king henri . no , faith , is't not , kate ; but thi speak of my 
 tongu , and i thine , most truli fals , must need be grant to 
 be much at one . but , kate , dost thou understand thu much 
 english- canst thou love me ? 
 katherin . i can not tell . 
 king henri . can ani of your neighbour tell , kate ? i 'll ask them . 
 come , i know thou lovest me ; and at night , when you come into 
 your closet , you 'll question thi gentlewoman about me ; and i 
 know , kate , you will to her disprais those part in me that you 
 love with your heart . but , good kate , mock me merci ; the 
 rather , gentl princess , becaus i love thee cruelli . if ever 
 thou beest mine , kate , as i have a save faith within me tell 
 me thou shalt , i get thee with scambl , and thou must therefor 
 need prove a good soldier-breed . shall not thou and i , between 
 saint deni and saint georg , compound a boy , half french , half 
 english , that shall go to constantinopl and take the turk by the 
 beard ? shall we not ? what say'st thou , my fair flower-de-luc ? 
 katherin . i do not know dat . 
 king henri . no : 't is hereaft to know , but now to promis ; do but 
 now promis , kate , you will endeavour for your french part of 
 such a boy ; and for my english moieti take the word of a king and 
 a bachelor . how answer you , la plu bell katherin du mond , mon 
 tre cher et divin deess ? 
 katherin . your majeste ave fauss french enough to deceiv de 
 most sage damoisel dat is en franc . 
 king henri . now , fie upon my fals french ! by mine honour , in true 
 english , i love thee , kate ; by which honour i dare not swear thou 
 lovest me ; yet my blood begin to flatter me that thou dost , 
 notwithstand the poor and untemp effect of my visag . now 
 beshrew my father 's ambit ! he wa think of civil war when 
 he got me ; therefor wa i creat with a stubborn outsid , with 
 an aspect of iron , that when i come to woo ladi i fright them . 
 but , in faith , kate , the elder i wax , the better i shall appear : 
 my comfort is , that old age , that in layer-up of beauti , can do 
 no more spoil upon my face ; thou hast me , if thou hast me , at the 
 worst ; and thou shalt wear me , if thou wear me , better and 
 better . and therefor tell me , most fair katherin , will you have 
 me ? put off your maiden blush ; avouch the thought of your 
 heart with the look of an empress ; take me by the hand and say 
 'harri of england , i am thine . ' which word thou shalt no sooner 
 bless mine ear withal but i will tell thee aloud 'england is 
 thine , ireland is thine , franc is thine , and henri plantagenet 
 is thine ' ; who , though i speak it befor hi face , if he be not 
 fellow with the best king , thou shalt find the best king of good 
 fellow . come , your answer in broken music- for thi voic is 
 music and thi english broken ; therefor , queen of all , katherin , 
 break thi mind to me in broken english , wilt thou have me ? 
 katherin . dat is as it shall pleas de roi mon pere . 
 king henri . nay , it will pleas him well , kate- it shall pleas 
 him , kate . 
 katherin . den it sall also content me . 
 king henri . upon that i kiss your hand , and i can you my queen . 
 katherin . laissez , mon seigneur , laissez , laissez ! ma foi , je ne 
 veux point que vou abaissiez votr grandeur en baisant la main 
 d'une , notr seigneur , indign serviteur ; excusez-moi , je vou 
 suppli , mon tre puissant seigneur . 
 king henri . then i will kiss your lip , kate . 
 katherin . le dame et demoisel pour etr baise devant leur 
 noce , il n'est pa la coutum de franc . 
 king henri . madam my interpret , what say she ? 
 alic . dat it is not be de fashion pour le ladi of france- i 
 can not tell vat is baiser en anglish . 
 king henri . to kiss . 
 alic . your majeste entendr bettr que moi . 
 king henri . it is not a fashion for the maid in franc to kiss 
 befor they are marri , would she say ? 
 alic . oui , vraiment . 
 king henri . o kate , nice custom curtsi to great king . dear kate , 
 you and i can not be confin 'd within the weak list of a countri 's 
 fashion ; we are the maker of manner , kate ; and the liberti that 
 follow our place stop the mouth of all find-faults- as i will 
 do your for uphold the nice fashion of your countri in 
 deni me a kiss ; therefor , patient and yield . [ kiss 
 her ] you have witchcraft in your lip , kate : there is more 
 eloqu in a sugar touch of them than in the tongu of the 
 french council ; and they should sooner persuad henri of england 
 than a gener petit of monarch . here come your father . 
 
 enter the french power and the english lord 
 
 burgundi . god save your majesti ! my royal cousin , 
 teach you our princess english ? 
 king henri . i would have her learn , my fair cousin , how perfectli i 
 love her ; and that is good english . 
 burgundi . is she not apt ? 
 king henri . our tongu is rough , coz , and my condit is not 
 smooth ; so that , have neither the voic nor the heart of 
 flatteri about me , i can not so conjur up the spirit of love in 
 her that he will appear in hi true like . 
 burgundi . pardon the frank of my mirth , if i answer you for 
 that . if you would conjur in her , you must make a circl ; if 
 conjur up love in her in hi true like , he must appear nake 
 and blind . can you blame her , then , be a maid yet ro 'd over 
 with the virgin crimson of modesti , if she deni the appear of 
 a nake blind boy in her nake see self ? it were , my lord , a 
 hard condit for a maid to consign to . 
 king henri . yet they do wink and yield , as love is blind and 
 enforc . 
 burgundi . they are then excu 'd , my lord , when they see not what 
 they do . 
 king henri . then , good my lord , teach your cousin to consent 
 wink . 
 burgundi . i will wink on her to consent , my lord , if you will teach 
 her to know my mean ; for maid well summer 'd and warm kept are 
 like fli at bartholomew-tid , blind , though they have their 
 eye ; and then they will endur handl , which befor would not 
 abid look on . 
 king henri . thi moral tie me over to time and a hot summer ; and 
 so i shall catch the fli , your cousin , in the latter end , and she 
 must be blind too . 
 burgundi . as love is , my lord , befor it love . 
 king henri . it is so ; and you may , some of you , thank love for my 
 blind , who can not see mani a fair french citi for one fair 
 french maid that stand in my way . 
 french king . ye , my lord , you see them perspect , the citi 
 turn into a maid ; for they are all girdl with maiden wall 
 that war hath never ent'r . 
 king henri . shall kate be my wife ? 
 french king . so pleas you . 
 king henri . i am content , so the maiden citi you talk of may wait 
 on her ; so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show 
 me the way to my will . 
 french king . we have consent to all term of reason . 
 king henri . is't so , my lord of england ? 
 westmoreland . the king hath grant everi articl : 
 hi daughter first ; and then in sequel , all , 
 accord to their firm propos natur . 
 exet . onli he hath not yet subscrib thi : 
 where your majesti demand that the king of franc , have ani 
 occas to write for matter of grant , shall name your high 
 in thi form and with thi addit , in french , notr tre cher 
 fil henri , roi d'angleterr , heriti de franc ; and thu in 
 latin , praeclarissimu filiu noster henricu , rex anglia et 
 haer francia . 
 french king . nor thi i have not , brother , so deni 
 but our request shall make me let it pass . 
 king henri . i pray you , then , in love and dear allianc , 
 let that one articl rank with the rest ; 
 and thereupon give me your daughter . 
 french king . take her , fair son , and from her blood rais up 
 issu to me ; that the contend kingdom 
 of franc and england , whose veri shore look pale 
 with envi of each other 's happi , 
 may ceas their hatr ; and thi dear conjunct 
 plant neighbourhood and christian-lik accord 
 in their sweet bosom , that never war advanc 
 hi bleed sword 'twixt england and fair franc . 
 lord . amen ! 
 king henri . now , welcom , kate ; and bear me wit all , 
 that here i kiss her as my sovereign queen . [ floulish ] 
 queen isabel . god , the best maker of all marriag , 
 combin your heart in one , your realm in one ! 
 as man and wife , be two , are one in love , 
 so be there 'twixt your kingdom such a spousal 
 that never may ill offic or fell jealousi , 
 which troubl oft the bed of bless marriag , 
 thrust in between the paction of these kingdom , 
 to make divorc of their incorpor leagu ; 
 that english may as french , french englishmen , 
 receiv each other . god speak thi amen ! 
 all . amen ! 
 king henri . prepar we for our marriag ; on which day , 
 my lord of burgundi , we 'll take your oath , 
 and all the peer ' , for sureti of our leagu . 
 then shall i swear to kate , and you to me , 
 and may our oath well kept and prosp'rou be ! 
 sennet . exeunt 
 
 epilogu 
 epilogu . 
 
 enter choru 
 
 choru . thu far , with rough and all-un pen , 
 our bend author hath pursu 'd the stori , 
 in littl room confin mighti men , 
 mangl by start the full cours of their glori . 
 small time , but , in that small , most greatli live 
 thi star of england . fortun made hi sword ; 
 by which the world 's best garden he achiev , 
 and of it left hi son imperi lord . 
 henri the sixth , in infant band crown 'd king 
 of franc and england , did thi king succeed ; 
 whose state so mani had the manag 
 that they lost franc and made hi england bleed ; 
 which oft our stage hath shown ; and , for their sake , 
 in your fair mind let thi accept take . exit 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the first part of henri the sixth 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 the duke of venic 
 the princ of morocco , suitor to portia 
 the princ of arragon , `` `` `` 
 antonio , a merchant of venic 
 bassanio , hi friend , suitor to portia 
 solanio , friend to antonio and bassanio 
 salerio , `` `` `` `` `` 
 gratiano , `` `` `` `` `` 
 lorenzo , in love with jessica 
 shylock , a rich jew 
 tubal , a jew , hi friend 
 launcelot gobbo , a clown , servant to shylock 
 old gobbo , father to launcelot 
 leonardo , servant to bassanio 
 balthasar , servant to portia 
 stephano , `` `` `` 
 
 portia , a rich heiress 
 nerissa , her waiting-maid 
 jessica , daughter to shylock 
 
 magnifico of venic , offic of the court of justic , 
 gaoler , servant , and other attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 venic , and portia 's hous at belmont 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter antonio , salerio , and solanio 
 
 antonio . in sooth , i know not whi i am so sad . 
 it weari me ; you say it weari you ; 
 but how i caught it , found it , or came by it , 
 what stuff 't is made of , whereof it is born , 
 i am to learn ; 
 and such a want-wit sad make of me 
 that i have much ado to know myself . 
 salerio . your mind is toss on the ocean ; 
 there where your argosi , with portli sail- 
 like signior and rich burgher on the flood , 
 or as it were the pageant of the sea- 
 do overp the petti traffick , 
 that curtsi to them , do them rever , 
 as they fli by them with their woven wing . 
 solanio . believ me , sir , had i such ventur forth , 
 the better part of my affect would 
 be with my hope abroad . i should be still 
 pluck the grass to know where sit the wind , 
 peer in map for port , and pier , and road ; 
 and everi object that might make me fear 
 misfortun to my ventur , out of doubt , 
 would make me sad . 
 salerio . my wind , cool my broth , 
 would blow me to an agu when i thought 
 what harm a wind too great might do at sea . 
 i should not see the sandi hour-glass run 
 but i should think of shallow and of flat , 
 and see my wealthi andrew dock 'd in sand , 
 vail her high top lower than her rib 
 to kiss her burial . should i go to church 
 and see the holi edific of stone , 
 and not bethink me straight of danger rock , 
 which , touch but my gentl vessel 's side , 
 would scatter all her spice on the stream , 
 enrob the roar water with my silk , 
 and , in a word , but even now worth thi , 
 and now worth noth ? shall i have the thought 
 to think on thi , and shall i lack the thought 
 that such a thing bechanc 'd would make me sad ? 
 but tell not me ; i know antonio 
 is sad to think upon hi merchandis . 
 antonio . believ me , no ; i thank my fortun for it , 
 my ventur are not in one bottom trust , 
 nor to one place ; nor is my whole estat 
 upon the fortun of thi present year ; 
 therefor my merchandis make me not sad . 
 solanio . whi then you are in love . 
 antonio . fie , fie ! 
 solanio . not in love neither ? then let us say you are sad 
 becaus you are not merri ; and 'twere as easi 
 for you to laugh and leap and say you are merri , 
 becaus you are not sad . now , by two-head janu , 
 natur hath fram 'd strang fellow in her time : 
 some that will evermor peep through their eye , 
 and laugh like parrot at a bag-pip ; 
 and other of such vinegar aspect 
 that they 'll not show their teeth in way of smile 
 though nestor swear the jest be laughabl . 
 
 enter bassanio , lorenzo , and gratiano 
 
 here come bassanio , your most nobl kinsman , 
 gratiano and lorenzo . fare ye well ; 
 we leav you now with better compani . 
 salerio . i would have stay 'd till i had made you merri , 
 if worthier friend had not prevent me . 
 antonio . your worth is veri dear in my regard . 
 i take it your own busi call on you , 
 and you embrac th ' occas to depart . 
 salerio . good morrow , my good lord . 
 bassanio . good signior both , when shall we laugh ? say when . 
 you grow exceed strang ; must it be so ? 
 salerio . we 'll make our leisur to attend on your . 
 exeunt salerio and solanio 
 lorenzo . my lord bassanio , sinc you have found antonio , 
 we two will leav you ; but at dinner-tim , 
 i pray you , have in mind where we must meet . 
 bassanio . i will not fail you . 
 gratiano . you look not well , signior antonio ; 
 you have too much respect upon the world ; 
 they lose it that do buy it with much care . 
 believ me , you are marvel chang 'd . 
 antonio . i hold the world but as the world , gratiano- 
 a stage , where everi man must play a part , 
 and mine a sad one . 
 gratiano . let me play the fool . 
 with mirth and laughter let old wrinkl come ; 
 and let my liver rather heat with wine 
 than my heart cool with mortifi groan . 
 whi should a man whose blood is warm within 
 sit like hi grandsir cut in alabast , 
 sleep when he wake , and creep into the jaundic 
 by be peevish ? i tell thee what , antonio- 
 i love thee , and 't is my love that speaks- 
 there are a sort of men whose visag 
 do cream and mantl like a stand pond , 
 and do a wil still entertain , 
 with purpos to be dress 'd in an opinion 
 of wisdom , graviti , profound conceit ; 
 as who should say ' i am sir oracl , 
 and when i ope my lip let no dog bark . ' 
 o my antonio , i do know of these 
 that therefor onli are reput wise 
 for say noth ; when , i am veri sure , 
 if they should speak , would almost damn those ear 
 which , hear them , would call their brother fool . 
 i 'll tell thee more of thi anoth time . 
 but fish not with thi melancholi bait 
 for thi fool gudgeon , thi opinion . 
 come , good lorenzo . fare ye well awhil ; 
 i 'll end my exhort after dinner . 
 lorenzo . well , we will leav you then till dinner-tim . 
 i must be one of these same dumb wise men , 
 for gratiano never let me speak . 
 gratiano . well , keep me compani but two year moe , 
 thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongu . 
 antonio . fare you well ; i 'll grow a talker for thi gear . 
 gratiano . thank , i ' faith , for silenc is onli commend 
 in a neat 's tongu dri , and a maid not vendibl . 
 exeunt gratiano and lorenzo 
 antonio . is that anyth now ? 
 bassanio . gratiano speak an infinit deal of noth , more than 
 ani man in all venic . hi reason are as two grain of wheat hid 
 in , two bushel of chaff : you shall seek all day ere you find 
 them , and when you have them they are not worth the search . 
 antonio . well ; tell me now what ladi is the same 
 to whom you swore a secret pilgrimag , 
 that you to-day promi 'd to tell me of ? 
 bassanio . 't is not unknown to you , antonio , 
 how much i have disabl mine estat 
 by someth show a more swell port 
 than my faint mean would grant continu ; 
 nor do i now make moan to be abridg 'd 
 from such a nobl rate ; but my chief care 
 is to come fairli off from the great debt 
 wherein my time , someth too prodig , 
 hath left me gag 'd . to you , antonio , 
 i owe the most , in money and in love ; 
 and from your love i have a warranti 
 to unburden all my plot and purpos 
 how to get clear of all the debt i owe . 
 antonio . i pray you , good bassanio , let me know it ; 
 and if it stand , as you yourself still do , 
 within the eye of honour , be assur 'd 
 my purs , my person , my extremest mean , 
 lie all unlock 'd to your occas . 
 bassanio . in my school-day , when i had lost one shaft , 
 i shot hi fellow of the self-sam flight 
 the self-sam way , with more advis watch , 
 to find the other forth ; and by adventur both 
 i oft found both . i urg thi childhood proof , 
 becaus what follow is pure innoc . 
 i owe you much ; and , like a wil youth , 
 that which i owe is lost ; but if you pleas 
 to shoot anoth arrow that self way 
 which you did shoot the first , i do not doubt , 
 as i will watch the aim , or to find both , 
 or bring your latter hazard back again 
 and thank rest debtor for the first . 
 antonio . you know me well , and herein spend but time 
 to wind about my love with circumst ; 
 and out of doubt you do me now more wrong 
 in make question of my uttermost 
 than if you had made wast of all i have . 
 then do but say to me what i should do 
 that in your knowledg may by me be done , 
 and i am prest unto it ; therefor , speak . 
 bassanio . in belmont is a ladi richli left , 
 and she is fair and , fairer than that word , 
 of wondrou virtu . sometim from her eye 
 i did receiv fair speechless messag . 
 her name is portia- noth undervalu 'd 
 to cato 's daughter , brutu ' portia . 
 nor is the wide world ignor of her worth ; 
 for the four wind blow in from everi coast 
 renown suitor , and her sunni lock 
 hang on her templ like a golden fleec , 
 which make her seat of belmont colcho ' strond , 
 and mani jason come in quest of her . 
 o my antonio , had i but the mean 
 to hold a rival place with one of them , 
 i have a mind presag me such thrift 
 that i should questionless be fortun . 
 antonio . thou know'st that all my fortun are at sea ; 
 neither have i money nor commod 
 to rais a present sum ; therefor go forth , 
 tri what my credit can in venic do ; 
 that shall be rack 'd , even to the uttermost , 
 to furnish thee to belmont to fair portia . 
 go present inquir , and so will i , 
 where money is ; and i no question make 
 to have it of my trust or for my sake . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 belmont . portia 's hous 
 
 enter portia with her waiting-woman , nerissa 
 
 portia . by my troth , nerissa , my littl bodi is aweari of thi 
 great world . 
 nerissa . you would be , sweet madam , if your miseri were in the 
 same abund as your good fortun are ; and yet , for aught i 
 see , they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that 
 starv with noth . it is no mean happi , therefor , to be 
 seat in the mean : superflu come sooner by white hair , but 
 compet live longer . 
 portia . good sentenc , and well pronounc 'd . 
 nerissa . they would be better , if well follow . 
 portia . if to do were as easi as to know what were good to do , 
 chapel had been church , and poor men 's cottag princ ' 
 palac . it is a good divin that follow hi own instruct ; i 
 can easier teach twenti what were good to be done than to be one 
 of the twenti to follow mine own teach . the brain may devis 
 law for the blood , but a hot temper leap o'er a cold decre ; 
 such a hare is mad the youth , to skip o'er the mesh of good 
 counsel the crippl . but thi reason is not in the fashion to 
 choos me a husband . o me , the word 'choos ' ! i may neither 
 choos who i would nor refus who i dislik ; so is the will of a 
 live daughter curb 'd by the will of a dead father . is it not 
 hard , nerissa , that i can not choos one , nor refus none ? 
 nerissa . your father wa ever virtuou , and holi men at their death 
 have good inspir ; therefor the lott'ri that he hath 
 devis in these three chest , of gold , silver , and lead- whereof 
 who choos hi mean choos you- will no doubt never be 
 chosen by ani rightli but one who you shall rightli love . but 
 what warmth is there in your affect toward ani of these 
 princ suitor that are alreadi come ? 
 portia . i pray thee over-nam them ; and as thou namest them , i will 
 describ them ; and accord to my descript , level at my 
 affect . 
 nerissa . first , there is the neapolitan princ . 
 portia . ay , that 's a colt inde , for he doth noth but talk of 
 hi hors ; and he make it a great appropri to hi own good 
 part that he can shoe him himself ; i am much afear 'd my ladi hi 
 mother play 'd fals with a smith . 
 nerissa . then is there the counti palatin . 
 portia . he doth noth but frown , as who should say 'an you will 
 not have me , choos . ' he hear merri tale and smile not . i fear 
 he will prove the weep philosoph when he grow old , be so 
 full of unmannerli sad in hi youth . i had rather be marri 
 to a death's-head with a bone in hi mouth than to either of 
 these . god defend me from these two ! 
 nerissa . how say you by the french lord , monsieur le bon ? 
 portia . god made him , and therefor let him pass for a man . in 
 truth , i know it is a sin to be a mocker , but he- whi , he hath a 
 hors better than the neapolitan 's , a better bad habit of 
 frown than the count palatin ; he is everi man in no man . if a 
 throstl sing he fall straight a-cap'r ; he will fenc with 
 hi own shadow ; if i should marri him , i should marri twenti 
 husband . if he would despis me , i would forgiv him ; for if he 
 love me to mad , i shall never requit him . 
 nerissa . what say you then to falconbridg , the young baron of 
 england ? 
 portia . you know i say noth to him , for he understand not me , 
 nor i him : he hath neither latin , french , nor italian , and you 
 will come into the court and swear that i have a poor pennyworth 
 in the english . he is a proper man 's pictur ; but ala , who can 
 convers with a dumb-show ? how oddli he is suit ! i think he 
 bought hi doublet in itali , hi round hose in franc , hi bonnet 
 in germani , and hi behaviour everywher . 
 nerissa . what think you of the scottish lord , hi neighbour ? 
 portia . that he hath a neighbourli chariti in him , for he borrow 
 a box of the ear of the englishman , and swore he would pay him 
 again when he wa abl ; i think the frenchman becam hi sureti , 
 and seal 'd under for anoth . 
 nerissa . how like you the young german , the duke of saxoni 's 
 nephew ? 
 portia . veri vile in the morn when he is sober ; and most 
 vile in the afternoon when he is drunk . when he is best , he is 
 a littl wors than a man , and when he is worst , he is littl 
 better than a beast . an the worst fall that ever fell , i hope i 
 shall make shift to go without him . 
 nerissa . if he should offer to choos , and choos the right casket , 
 you should refus to perform your father 's will , if you should 
 refus to accept him . 
 portia . therefor , for fear of the worst , i pray thee set a deep 
 glass of rhenish wine on the contrari casket ; for if the devil be 
 within and that temptat without , i know he will choos it . i 
 will do anyth , nerissa , ere i will be marri to a spong . 
 nerissa . you need not fear , ladi , the have ani of these lord ; 
 they have acquaint me with their determin , which is 
 inde to return to their home , and to troubl you with no more 
 suit , unless you may be won by some other sort than your father 's 
 imposit , depend on the casket . 
 portia . if i live to be as old as sibylla , i will die as chast as 
 diana , unless i be obtain by the manner of my father 's will . i 
 am glad thi parcel of wooer are so reason ; for there is not 
 one among them but i dote on hi veri absenc , and i pray god 
 grant them a fair departur . 
 nerissa . do you not rememb , ladi , in your father 's time , a 
 venetian , a scholar and a soldier , that came hither in compani of 
 the marqui of montferrat ? 
 portia . ye , ye , it wa bassanio ; as i think , so wa he call 'd . 
 nerissa . true , madam ; he , of all the men that ever my foolish eye 
 look 'd upon , wa the best deserv a fair ladi . 
 portia . i rememb him well , and i rememb him worthi of thi 
 prais . 
 
 enter a servingman 
 
 how now ! what news ? 
 servingman . the four stranger seek for you , madam , to take their 
 leav ; and there is a forerunn come from a fifth , the princ of 
 morocco , who bring word the princ hi master will be here 
 to-night . 
 portia . if i could bid the fifth welcom with so good heart as i 
 can bid the other four farewel , i should be glad of hi 
 approach ; if he have the condit of a saint and the complexion 
 of a devil , i had rather he should shrive me than wive me . 
 come , nerissa . sirrah , go befor . 
 while we shut the gate upon one wooer , anoth knock at the 
 door . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 venic . a public place 
 
 enter bassanio with shylock the jew 
 
 shylock . three thousand ducats- well . 
 bassanio . ay , sir , for three month . 
 shylock . for three months- well . 
 bassanio . for the which , as i told you , antonio shall be bound . 
 shylock . antonio shall becom bound- well . 
 bassanio . may you stead me ? will you pleasur me ? shall i know your 
 answer ? 
 shylock . three thousand ducat for three month , and antonio bound . 
 bassanio . your answer to that . 
 shylock . antonio is a good man . 
 bassanio . have you heard ani imput to the contrari ? 
 shylock . ho , no , no , no , no ; my mean in say he is a good man 
 is to have you understand me that he is suffici ; yet hi mean 
 are in supposit : he hath an argosi bound to tripoli , anoth 
 to the indi ; i understand , moreov , upon the rialto , he hath a 
 third at mexico , a fourth for england- and other ventur he 
 hath , squand'r abroad . but ship are but board , sailor but 
 men ; there be land-rat and water-rat , water-thiev and 
 land-thieves- i mean pirat ; and then there is the peril of 
 water , wind , and rock . the man is , notwithstand , 
 suffici . three thousand ducats- i think i may take hi bond . 
 bassanio . be assur 'd you may . 
 shylock . i will be assur 'd i may ; and , that i may be assur , i 
 will bethink me . may i speak with antonio ? 
 bassanio . if it pleas you to dine with us . 
 shylock . ye , to smell pork , to eat of the habit which your 
 prophet , the nazarit , conjur the devil into ! i will buy with 
 you , sell with you , talk with you , walk with you , and so 
 follow ; but i will not eat with you , drink with you , nor pray 
 with you . what news on the rialto ? who is he come here ? 
 
 enter antonio 
 
 bassanio . thi is signior antonio . 
 shylock . [ asid ] how like a fawn publican he look ! 
 i hate him for he is a christian ; 
 but more for that in low simplic 
 he lend out money grati , and bring down 
 the rate of usanc here with us in venic . 
 if i can catch him onc upon the hip , 
 i will feed fat the ancient grudg i bear him . 
 he hate our sacr nation ; and he rail , 
 even there where merchant most do congreg , 
 on me , my bargain , and my well-won thrift , 
 which he call interest . curs be my tribe 
 if i forgiv him ! 
 bassanio . shylock , do you hear ? 
 shylock . i am debat of my present store , 
 and , by the near guess of my memori , 
 i can not instantli rais up the gross 
 of full three thousand ducat . what of that ? 
 tubal , a wealthi hebrew of my tribe , 
 will furnish me . but soft ! how mani month 
 do you desir ? [ to antonio ] rest you fair , good signior ; 
 your worship wa the last man in our mouth . 
 antonio . shylock , albeit i neither lend nor borrow 
 by take nor by give of excess , 
 yet , to suppli the ripe want of my friend , 
 i 'll break a custom . [ to bassanio ] is he yet possess 'd 
 how much ye would ? 
 shylock . ay , ay , three thousand ducat . 
 antonio . and for three month . 
 shylock . i had forgot- three month ; you told me so . 
 well then , your bond ; and , let me see- but hear you , 
 methought you said you neither lend nor borrow 
 upon advantag . 
 antonio . i do never use it . 
 shylock . when jacob graz 'd hi uncl laban 's sheep- 
 thi jacob from our holi abram wa , 
 as hi wise mother wrought in hi behalf , 
 the third possessor ; ay , he wa the third- 
 antonio . and what of him ? did he take interest ? 
 shylock . no , not take interest ; not , as you would say , 
 directli int'rest ; mark what jacob did : 
 when laban and himself were compromi 'd 
 that all the eanl which were streak 'd and pie 
 should fall as jacob 's hire , the ewe , be rank , 
 in end of autumn turn to the ram ; 
 and when the work of gener wa 
 between these woolli breeder in the act , 
 the skil shepherd pill 'd me certain wand , 
 and , in the do of the deed of kind , 
 he stuck them up befor the fulsom ewe , 
 who , then conceiv , did in ean time 
 fall parti-colour 'd lamb , and those were jacob 's . 
 thi wa a way to thrive , and he wa blest ; 
 and thrift is bless , if men steal it not . 
 antonio . thi wa a ventur , sir , that jacob serv 'd for ; 
 a thing not in hi power to bring to pass , 
 but sway 'd and fashion 'd by the hand of heaven . 
 wa thi insert to make interest good ? 
 or is your gold and silver ewe and ram ? 
 shylock . i can not tell ; i make it breed as fast . 
 but note me , signior . 
 antonio . [ asid ] mark you thi , bassanio , 
 the devil can cite scriptur for hi purpos . 
 an evil soul produc holi wit 
 is like a villain with a smile cheek , 
 a goodli appl rotten at the heart . 
 o , what a goodli outsid falsehood hath ! 
 shylock . three thousand ducats- 't is a good round sum . 
 three month from twelv ; then let me see , the rate- 
 antonio . well , shylock , shall we be behold to you ? 
 shylock . signior antonio , mani a time and oft 
 in the rialto you have rate me 
 about my money and my usanc ; 
 still have i born it with a patient shrug , 
 for suff'ranc is the badg of all our tribe ; 
 you call me misbeliev , cut-throat dog , 
 and spit upon my jewish gaberdin , 
 and all for use of that which is mine own . 
 well then , it now appear you need my help ; 
 go to , then ; you come to me , and you say 
 'shylock , we would have money . ' you say so- 
 you that did void your rheum upon my beard 
 and foot me as you spurn a stranger cur 
 over your threshold ; money is your suit . 
 what should i say to you ? should i not say 
 'hath a dog money ? is it possibl 
 a cur can lend three thousand ducat ? ' or 
 shall i bend low and , in a bondman 's key , 
 with bate breath and whisp'r humbl , 
 say thi : 
 'fair sir , you spit on me on wednesday last , 
 you spurn 'd me such a day ; anoth time 
 you call 'd me dog ; and for these courtesi 
 i 'll lend you thu much money ' ? 
 antonio . i am as like to call thee so again , 
 to spit on thee again , to spurn thee too . 
 if thou wilt lend thi money , lend it not 
 as to thi friends- for when did friendship take 
 a breed for barren metal of hi friend ? - 
 but lend it rather to thine enemi , 
 who if he break thou mayst with better face 
 exact the penalti . 
 shylock . whi , look you , how you storm ! 
 i would be friend with you , and have your love , 
 forget the shame that you have stain 'd me with , 
 suppli your present want , and take no doit 
 of usanc for my money , and you 'll not hear me . 
 thi is kind i offer . 
 bassanio . thi were kind . 
 shylock . thi kind will i show . 
 go with me to a notari , seal me there 
 your singl bond , and , in a merri sport , 
 if you repay me not on such a day , 
 in such a place , such sum or sum as are 
 express 'd in the condit , let the forfeit 
 be nomin for an equal pound 
 of your fair flesh , to be cut off and taken 
 in what part of your bodi pleaseth me . 
 antonio . content , in faith ; i 'll seal to such a bond , 
 and say there is much kind in the jew . 
 bassanio . you shall not seal to such a bond for me ; 
 i 'll rather dwell in my necess . 
 antonio . whi , fear not , man ; i will not forfeit it ; 
 within these two months- that 's a month befor 
 thi bond expires- i do expect return 
 of thrice three time the valu of thi bond . 
 shylock . o father abram , what these christian are , 
 whose own hard deal teach them suspect 
 the thought of other ! pray you , tell me thi : 
 if he should break hi day , what should i gain 
 by the exact of the forfeitur ? 
 a pound of man 's flesh taken from a man 
 is not so estim , profit neither , 
 as flesh of mutton , beef , or goat . i say , 
 to buy hi favour , i extend thi friendship ; 
 if he will take it , so ; if not , adieu ; 
 and , for my love , i pray you wrong me not . 
 antonio . ye , shylock , i will seal unto thi bond . 
 shylock . then meet me forthwith at the notari 's ; 
 give him direct for thi merri bond , 
 and i will go and purs the ducat straight , 
 see to my hous , left in the fear guard 
 of an unthrifti knave , and present 
 i 'll be with you . 
 antonio . hie thee , gentl jew . exit shylock 
 the hebrew will turn christian : he grow kind . 
 bassanio . i like not fair term and a villain 's mind . 
 antonio . come on ; in thi there can be no dismay ; 
 my ship come home a month befor the day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 belmont . portia 's hous 
 
 flourish of cornet . enter the princ of morocco , a tawni moor all in white , 
 and three or four follow accordingli , with portia , nerissa , and train 
 
 princ of morocco . mislik me not for my complexion , 
 the shadow liveri of the burnish 'd sun , 
 to whom i am a neighbour , and near bred . 
 bring me the fairest creatur northward born , 
 where phoebu ' fire scarc thaw the icicl , 
 and let us make incis for your love 
 to prove whose blood is reddest , hi or mine . 
 i tell thee , ladi , thi aspect of mine 
 hath fear 'd the valiant ; by my love , i swear 
 the best-regard virgin of our clime 
 have lov 'd it too . i would not chang thi hue , 
 except to steal your thought , my gentl queen . 
 portia . in term of choic i am not sole led 
 by nice direct of a maiden 's eye ; 
 besid , the lott'ri of my destini 
 bar me the right of voluntari choos . 
 but , if my father had not scant me , 
 and hedg 'd me by hi wit to yield myself 
 hi wife who win me by that mean i told you , 
 yourself , renown princ , then stood as fair 
 as ani comer i have look 'd on yet 
 for my affect . 
 princ of morocco . even for that i thank you . 
 therefor , i pray you , lead me to the casket 
 to tri my fortun . by thi scimitar , 
 that slew the sophi and a persian princ , 
 that won three field of sultan solyman , 
 i would o'erstar the sternest eye that look , 
 outbrav the heart most dare on the earth , 
 pluck the young suck cub from the she-bear , 
 yea , mock the lion when ' a roar for prey , 
 to win thee , ladi . but , ala the while ! 
 if hercul and licha play at dice 
 which is the better man , the greater throw 
 may turn by fortun from the weaker band . 
 so is alcid beaten by hi page ; 
 and so may i , blind fortun lead me , 
 miss that which one unworthi may attain , 
 and die with griev . 
 portia . you must take your chanc , 
 and either not attempt to choos at all , 
 or swear befor you choos , if you choos wrong , 
 never to speak to ladi afterward 
 in way of marriag ; therefor be advi 'd . 
 princ of morocco . nor will not ; come , bring me unto my chanc . 
 portia . first , forward to the templ . after dinner 
 your hazard shall be made . 
 princ of morocco . good fortun then , 
 to make me blest or cursed'st among men ! 
 [ cornet , and exeunt ] 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter launcelot gobbo 
 
 launcelot . certainli my conscienc will serv me to run from thi 
 jew my master . the fiend is at mine elbow and tempt me , say 
 to me 'gobbo , launcelot gobbo , good launcelot ' or 'good gobbo ' or 
 'good launcelot gobbo , use your leg , take the start , run away . ' 
 my conscienc say 'no ; take heed , honest launcelot , take heed , 
 honest gobbo ' or , as aforesaid , 'honest launcelot gobbo , do not 
 run ; scorn run with thi heel . ' well , the most courag 
 fiend bid me pack . 'via ! ' say the fiend ; 'away ! ' say the 
 fiend . 'for the heaven , rous up a brave mind ' say the fiend 
 'and run . ' well , my conscienc , hang about the neck of my 
 heart , say veri wise to me 'mi honest friend launcelot , be 
 an honest man 's son ' or rather 'an honest woman 's son ' ; for 
 inde my father did someth smack , someth grow to , he had a 
 kind of taste- well , my conscienc say 'launcelot , budg not . ' 
 'budg , ' say the fiend . 'budg not , ' say my conscienc . 
 'conscienc , ' say i , ( you counsel well . ' 'fiend , ' say i , 'you 
 counsel well . ' to be rul 'd by my conscienc , i should stay with 
 the jew my master , who- god bless the mark ! - is a kind of devil ; 
 and , to run away from the jew , i should be rule by the fiend , 
 who- save your rever ! - is the devil himself . certainli the 
 jew is the veri devil incarn ; and , in my conscienc , my 
 conscienc is but a kind of hard conscienc to offer to counsel 
 me to stay with the jew . the fiend give the more friendli 
 counsel . i will run , fiend ; my heel are at your command ; i 
 will run . 
 
 enter old gobbo , with a basket 
 
 gobbo . master young man , you , i pray you , which is the way to 
 master jew 's ? 
 launcelot . [ asid ] o heaven ! thi is my true-begotten father , 
 who , be more than sand-blind , high-gravel blind , know me not . 
 i will tri confus with him . 
 gobbo . master young gentleman , i pray you , which is the way to 
 master jew 's ? 
 launcelot . turn up on your right hand at the next turn , but , at 
 the next turn of all , on your left ; marri , at the veri next 
 turn , turn of no hand , but turn down indirectli to the jew 's 
 hous . 
 gobbo . be god 's sonti , 'twill be a hard way to hit ! can you tell 
 me whether one launcelot , that dwell with him , dwell with him or 
 no ? 
 launcelot . talk you of young master launcelot ? [ asid ] mark me 
 now ; now will i rais the waters.- talk you of young master 
 launcelot ? 
 gobbo . no master , sir , but a poor man 's son ; hi father , though i 
 say't , is an honest exceed poor man , and , god be thank , well 
 to live . 
 launcelot . well , let hi father be what ' a will , we talk of young 
 master launcelot . 
 gobbo . your worship 's friend , and launcelot , sir . 
 launcelot . but i pray you , ergo , old man , ergo , i beseech you , talk 
 you of young master launcelot ? 
 gobbo . of launcelot , a n't pleas your mastership . 
 launcelot . ergo , master launcelot . talk not of master launcelot , 
 father ; for the young gentleman , accord to fate and destini 
 and such odd say , the sister three and such branch of 
 learn , is inde deceas ; or , as you would say in plain 
 term , gone to heaven . 
 gobbo . marri , god forbid ! the boy wa the veri staff of my age , my 
 veri prop . 
 launcelot . do i look like a cudgel or a hovel-post , a staff or a 
 prop ? do you know me , father ? 
 gobbo . alack the day , i know you not , young gentleman ; but i pray 
 you tell me , is my boy- god rest hi soul ! - aliv or dead ? 
 launcelot . do you not know me , father ? 
 gobbo . alack , sir , i am sand-blind ; i know you not . 
 launcelot . nay , inde , if you had your eye , you might fail of the 
 know me : it is a wise father that know hi own child . well , 
 old man , i will tell you news of your son . give me your bless ; 
 truth will come to light ; murder can not be hid long ; a man 's son 
 may , but in the end truth will out . 
 gobbo . pray you , sir , stand up ; i am sure you are not launcelot my 
 boy . 
 launcelot . pray you , let 's have no more fool about it , but give 
 me your bless ; i am launcelot , your boy that wa , your son 
 that is , your child that shall be . 
 gobbo . i can not think you are my son . 
 launcelot . i know not what i shall think of that ; but i am 
 launcelot , the jew 's man , and i am sure margeri your wife is my 
 mother . 
 gobbo . her name is margeri , inde . i 'll be sworn , if thou be 
 launcelot , thou art mine own flesh and blood . lord worshipp 'd 
 might he be , what a beard hast thou got ! thou hast got more hair 
 on thi chin than dobbin my fill-hors ha on hi tail . 
 launcelot . it should seem , then , that dobbin 's tail grow backward ; 
 i am sure he had more hair of hi tail than i have of my face 
 when i last saw him . 
 gobbo . lord , how art thou chang 'd ! how dost thou and thi master 
 agre ? i have brought him a present . how 'gree you now ? 
 launcelot . well , well ; but , for mine own part , as i have set up my 
 rest to run away , so i will not rest till i have run some ground . 
 my master 's a veri jew . give him a present ! give him a halter . i 
 am famish 'd in hi servic ; you may tell everi finger i have with 
 my rib . father , i am glad you are come ; give me your present to 
 one master bassanio , who inde give rare new liveri ; if i 
 serv not him , i will run as far as god ha ani ground . o rare 
 fortun ! here come the man . to him , father , for i am a jew , if i 
 serv the jew ani longer . 
 
 enter bassanio , with leonardo , with a follow or two 
 
 bassanio . you may do so ; but let it be so hast that supper be 
 readi at the farthest by five of the clock . see these letter 
 deliv , put the liveri to make , and desir gratiano to 
 come anon to my lodg . exit a servant 
 launcelot . to him , father . 
 gobbo . god bless your worship ! 
 bassanio . gramerci ; wouldst thou aught with me ? 
 gobbo . here 's my son , sir , a poor boy- 
 launcelot . not a poor boy , sir , but the rich jew 's man , that would , 
 sir , as my father shall specify- 
 gobbo . he hath a great infect , sir , as one would say , to serve- 
 launcelot . inde the short and the long is , i serv the jew , and 
 have a desir , as my father shall specify- 
 gobbo . hi master and he , save your worship 's rever , are 
 scarc cater-cousins- 
 launcelot . to be brief , the veri truth is that the jew , have done 
 me wrong , doth caus me , as my father , be i hope an old man , 
 shall frutifi unto you- 
 gobbo . i have here a dish of dove that i would bestow upon your 
 worship ; and my suit is- 
 launcelot . in veri brief , the suit is impertin to myself , as 
 your worship shall know by thi honest old man ; and , though i say 
 it , though old man , yet poor man , my father . 
 bassanio . one speak for both . what would you ? 
 launcelot . serv you , sir . 
 gobbo . that is the veri defect of the matter , sir . 
 bassanio . i know thee well ; thou hast obtain 'd thi suit . 
 shylock thi master spoke with me thi day , 
 and hath preferr 'd thee , if it be prefer 
 to leav a rich jew 's servic to becom 
 the follow of so poor a gentleman . 
 launcelot . the old proverb is veri well part between my master 
 shylock and you , sir : you have the grace of god , sir , and he hath 
 enough . 
 bassanio . thou speak'st it well . go , father , with thi son . 
 take leav of thi old master , and inquir 
 my lodg out . [ to a servant ] give him a liveri 
 more guard than hi fellow ' ; see it done . 
 launcelot . father , in . i can not get a servic , no ! i have ne'er a 
 tongu in my head ! [ look on hi palm ] well ; if ani man in 
 itali have a fairer tabl which doth offer to swear upon a book- i 
 shall have good fortun . go to , here 's a simpl line of life ; 
 here 's a small trifl of wive ; ala , fifteen wive is noth ; 
 a'leven widow and nine maid is a simpl coming-in for one man . 
 and then to scape drown thrice , and to be in peril of my life 
 with the edg of a feather-bed-her are simpl scape . well , if 
 fortun be a woman , she 's a good wench for thi gear . father , 
 come ; i 'll take my leav of the jew in the twinkl . 
 exeunt launcelot and old gobbo 
 bassanio . i pray thee , good leonardo , think on thi . 
 these thing be bought and orderli bestow , 
 return in hast , for i do feast to-night 
 my best esteem 'd acquaint ; hie thee , go . 
 leonardo . my best endeavour shall be done herein . 
 
 enter gratiano 
 
 gratiano . where 's your master ? 
 leonardo . yonder , sir , he walk . exit 
 gratiano . signior bassanio ! 
 bassanio . gratiano ! 
 gratiano . i have suit to you . 
 bassanio . you have obtain 'd it . 
 gratiano . you must not deni me : i must go with you to belmont . 
 bassanio . whi , then you must . but hear thee , gratiano : 
 thou art too wild , too rude , and bold of voice- 
 part that becom thee happili enough , 
 and in such eye as our appear not fault ; 
 but where thou art not known , whi there they show 
 someth too liber . pray thee , take pain 
 to allay with some cold drop of modesti 
 thi skip spirit ; lest through thi wild behaviour 
 i be misconst'r in the place i go to 
 and lose my hope . 
 gratiano . signior bassanio , hear me : 
 if i do not put on a sober habit , 
 talk with respect , and swear but now and then , 
 wear prayer-book in my pocket , look demur , 
 nay more , while grace is say hood mine eye 
 thu with my hat , and sigh , and say amen , 
 use all the observ of civil 
 like one well studi in a sad ostent 
 to pleas hi grandam , never trust me more . 
 bassanio . well , we shall see your bear . 
 gratiano . nay , but i bar to-night ; you shall not gaug me 
 by what we do to-night . 
 bassanio . no , that were piti ; 
 i would entreat you rather to put on 
 your boldest suit of mirth , for we have friend 
 that purpos merriment . but fare you well ; 
 i have some busi . 
 gratiano . and i must to lorenzo and the rest ; 
 but we will visit you at supper-tim . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 venic . shylock 's hous 
 
 enter jessica and launcelot 
 
 jessica . i am sorri thou wilt leav my father so . 
 our hous is hell ; and thou , a merri devil , 
 didst rob it of some tast of tedious . 
 but fare thee well ; there is a ducat for thee ; 
 and , launcelot , soon at supper shalt thou see 
 lorenzo , who is thi new master 's guest . 
 give him thi letter ; do it secretli . 
 and so farewel . i would not have my father 
 see me in talk with thee . 
 launcelot . adieu ! tear exhibit my tongu . most beauti pagan , 
 most sweet jew ! if a christian do not play the knave and get 
 thee , i am much deceiv . but , adieu ! these foolish drop do 
 someth drown my manli spirit ; adieu ! 
 jessica . farewel , good launcelot . exit launcelot 
 alack , what heinou sin is it in me 
 to be asham 'd to be my father 's child ! 
 but though i am a daughter to hi blood , 
 i am not to hi manner . o lorenzo , 
 if thou keep promis , i shall end thi strife , 
 becom a christian and thi love wife . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter gratiano , lorenzo , salerio , and solanio 
 
 lorenzo . nay , we will slink away in suppertim , 
 disguis us at my lodg , and return 
 all in an hour . 
 gratiano . we have not made good prepar . 
 salerio . we have not spoke us yet of torch-bear . 
 solanio . 't is vile , unless it may be quaintli order ; 
 and better in my mind not undertook . 
 lorenzo . 't is now but four o'clock ; we have two hour 
 to furnish us . 
 
 enter launcelot , with a letter 
 
 friend launcelot , what 's the news ? 
 launcelot . an it shall pleas you to break up thi , it shall seem 
 to signifi . 
 lorenzo . i know the hand ; in faith , 't is a fair hand , 
 and whiter than the paper it writ on 
 is the fair hand that writ . 
 gratiano . love-new , in faith ! 
 launcelot . by your leav , sir . 
 lorenzo . whither goest thou ? 
 launcelot . marri , sir , to bid my old master , the jew , to sup 
 to-night with my new master , the christian . 
 lorenzo . hold , here , take thi . tell gentl jessica 
 i will not fail her ; speak it privat . 
 go , gentlemen , exit launcelot 
 will you prepar you for thi masqu to-night ? 
 i am provid of a torch-bear . 
 salerio . ay , marri , i 'll be gone about it straight . 
 solanio . and so will i . 
 lorenzo . meet me and gratiano 
 at gratiano 's lodg some hour henc . 
 salerio . 't is good we do so . exeunt salerio and solanio 
 gratiano . wa not that letter from fair jessica ? 
 lorenzo . i must need tell thee all . she hath direct 
 how i shall take her from her father 's hous ; 
 what gold and jewel she is furnish 'd with ; 
 what page 's suit she hath in readi . 
 if e'er the jew her father come to heaven , 
 it will be for hi gentl daughter 's sake ; 
 and never dare misfortun cross her foot , 
 unless she do it under thi excus , 
 that she is issu to a faithless jew . 
 come , go with me , perus thi as thou goest ; 
 fair jessica shall be my torch-bear . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 venic . befor shylock 's hous 
 
 enter shylock and launcelot 
 
 shylock . well , thou shalt see ; thi eye shall be thi judg , 
 the differ of old shylock and bassanio.- 
 what , jessica ! - thou shalt not gormand 
 as thou hast done with me- what , jessica ! - 
 and sleep and snore , and rend apparel out- 
 whi , jessica , i say ! 
 launcelot . whi , jessica ! 
 shylock . who bid thee call ? i do not bid thee call . 
 launcelot . your worship wa wont to tell me i could do noth 
 without bid . 
 
 enter jessica 
 
 jessica . call you ? what is your will ? 
 shylock . i am bid forth to supper , jessica ; 
 there are my key . but wherefor should i go ? 
 i am not bid for love ; they flatter me ; 
 but yet i 'll go in hate , to feed upon 
 the prodig christian . jessica , my girl , 
 look to my hous . i am right loath to go ; 
 there is some ill a-brew toward my rest , 
 for i did dream of money-bag to-night . 
 launcelot . i beseech you , sir , go ; my young master doth expect your 
 reproach . 
 shylock . so do i hi . 
 launcelot . and they have conspir togeth ; i will not say you 
 shall see a masqu , but if you do , then it wa not for noth 
 that my nose fell a-bleed on black monday last at six o'clock 
 i ' th ' morn , fall out that year on ash wednesday wa four 
 year , in th ' afternoon . 
 shylock . what , are there masqu ? hear you me , jessica : 
 lock up my door , and when you hear the drum , 
 and the vile squeal of the wry-neck 'd fife , 
 clamber not you up to the casement then , 
 nor thrust your head into the public street 
 to gaze on christian fool with varnish 'd face ; 
 but stop my hous 's ears- i mean my casement ; 
 let not the sound of shallow fopp'ri enter 
 my sober hous . by jacob 's staff , i swear 
 i have no mind of feast forth to-night ; 
 but i will go . go you befor me , sirrah ; 
 say i will come . 
 launcelot . i will go befor , sir . mistress , look out at window for 
 all thi . 
 there will come a christian by 
 will be worth a jewess ' eye . exit 
 shylock . what say that fool of hagar 's offspr , ha ? 
 jessica . hi word were 'farewel , mistress ' ; noth els . 
 shylock . the patch is kind enough , but a huge feeder , 
 snail-slow in profit , and he sleep by day 
 more than the wild-cat ; drone hive not with me , 
 therefor i part with him ; and part with him 
 to one that i would have him help to wast 
 hi borrow purs . well , jessica , go in ; 
 perhap i will return immedi . 
 do as i bid you , shut door after you . 
 fast bind , fast find- 
 a proverb never stale in thrifti mind . exit 
 jessica . farewel ; and if my fortun be not crost , 
 i have a father , you a daughter , lost . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 venic . befor shylock 's hous 
 
 enter the masker , gratiano and salerio 
 
 gratiano . thi is the pent-hous under which lorenzo 
 desir us to make stand . 
 salerio . hi hour is almost past . 
 gratiano . and it is marvel he out-dwel hi hour , 
 for lover ever run befor the clock . 
 salerio . o , ten time faster venu ' pigeon fli 
 to seal love 's bond new made than they are wont 
 to keep oblig faith unforfeit ! 
 gratiano . that ever hold : who riseth from a feast 
 with that keen appetit that he sit down ? 
 where is the hors that doth untread again 
 hi tediou measur with the unbat fire 
 that he did pace them first ? all thing that are 
 are with more spirit chase than enjoy . 
 how like a younker or a prodig 
 the scarf bark put from her nativ bay , 
 hugg 'd and embrac by the strumpet wind ; 
 how like the prodig doth she return , 
 with over-weath 'd rib and rag sail , 
 lean , rent , and beggar 'd by the strumpet wind ! 
 
 enter lorenzo 
 
 salerio . here come lorenzo ; more of thi hereaft . 
 lorenzo . sweet friend , your patienc for my long abod ! 
 not i , but my affair , have made you wait . 
 when you shall pleas to play the thiev for wive , 
 i 'll watch as long for you then . approach ; 
 here dwell my father jew . ho ! who 's within ? 
 
 enter jessica , abov , in boy 's cloth 
 
 jessica . who are you ? tell me , for more certainti , 
 albeit i 'll swear that i do know your tongu . 
 lorenzo . lorenzo , and thi love . 
 jessica . lorenzo , certain ; and my love inde ; 
 for who love i so much ? and now who know 
 but you , lorenzo , whether i am your ? 
 lorenzo . heaven and thi thought are wit that thou art . 
 jessica . here , catch thi casket ; it is worth the pain . 
 i am glad 't is night , you do not look on me , 
 for i am much asham 'd of my exchang ; 
 but love is blind , and lover can not see 
 the pretti folli that themselv commit , 
 for , if they could , cupid himself would blush 
 to see me thu transform to a boy . 
 lorenzo . descend , for you must be my torch-bear . 
 jessica . what ! must i hold a candl to my shame ? 
 they in themselv , good sooth , are too too light . 
 whi , 't is an offic of discoveri , love , 
 and i should be obscur 'd . 
 lorenzo . so are you , sweet , 
 even in the love garnish of a boy . 
 but come at onc , 
 for the close night doth play the runaway , 
 and we are stay 'd for at bassanio 's feast . 
 jessica . i will make fast the door , and gild myself 
 with some moe ducat , and be with you straight . 
 exit abov 
 
 gratiano . now , by my hood , a gentl , and no jew . 
 lorenzo . beshrew me , but i love her heartili , 
 for she is wise , if i can judg of her , 
 and fair she is , if that mine eye be true , 
 and true she is , as she hath prov 'd herself ; 
 and therefor , like herself , wise , fair , and true , 
 shall she be place in my constant soul . 
 
 enter jessica , below 
 
 what , art thou come ? on , gentlemen , away ; 
 our masqu mate by thi time for us stay . 
 exit with jessica and salerio 
 
 enter antonio 
 
 antonio . who 's there ? 
 gratiano . signior antonio ? 
 antonio . fie , fie , gratiano , where are all the rest ? 
 't is nine o'clock ; our friend all stay for you ; 
 no masqu to-night ; the wind is come about ; 
 bassanio present will go aboard ; 
 i have sent twenti out to seek for you . 
 gratiano . i am glad o n't ; i desir no more delight 
 than to be under sail and gone to-night . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 belmont . portia 's hous 
 
 flourish of cornet . enter portia , with the princ of morocco , 
 and their train 
 
 portia . go draw asid the curtain and discov 
 the sever casket to thi nobl princ . 
 now make your choic . 
 princ of morocco . the first , of gold , who thi inscript bear : 
 'who chooseth me shall gain what mani men desir . ' 
 the second , silver , which thi promis carri : 
 'who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserv . ' 
 thi third , dull lead , with warn all as blunt : 
 'who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath . ' 
 how shall i know if i do choos the right ? 
 portia . the one of them contain my pictur , princ ; 
 if you choos that , then i am your withal . 
 princ of morocco . some god direct my judgment ! let me see ; 
 i will survey th ' inscript back again . 
 what say thi leaden casket ? 
 'who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath . ' 
 must give- for what ? for lead ? hazard for lead ! 
 thi casket threaten ; men that hazard all 
 do it in hope of fair advantag . 
 a golden mind stoop not to show of dross ; 
 i 'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead . 
 what say the silver with her virgin hue ? 
 'who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserv . ' 
 as much as he deserv ! paus there , morocco , 
 and weigh thi valu with an even hand . 
 if thou beest rate by thi estim , 
 thou dost deserv enough , and yet enough 
 may not extend so far as to the ladi ; 
 and yet to be afeard of my deserv 
 were but a weak disabl of myself . 
 as much as i deserv ? whi , that 's the ladi ! 
 i do in birth deserv her , and in fortun , 
 in grace , and in qualiti of breed ; 
 but more than these , in love i do deserv . 
 what if i stray 'd no farther , but chose here ? 
 let 's see onc more thi say grav 'd in gold : 
 'who chooseth me shall gain what mani men desir . ' 
 whi , that 's the ladi ! all the world desir her ; 
 from the four corner of the earth they come 
 to kiss thi shrine , thi mortal-breath saint . 
 the hyrcanian desert and the vasti wild 
 of wide arabia are as throughfar now 
 for princ to come view fair portia . 
 the wateri kingdom , whose ambiti head 
 spit in the face of heaven , is no bar 
 to stop the foreign spirit , but they come 
 as o'er a brook to see fair portia . 
 one of these three contain her heavenli pictur . 
 is't like that lead contain her ? 'twere damnat 
 to think so base a thought ; it were too gross 
 to rib her cerecloth in the obscur grave . 
 or shall i think in silver she 's immur 'd , 
 be ten time undervalu to tri gold ? 
 o sin thought ! never so rich a gem 
 wa set in wors than gold . they have in england 
 a coin that bear the figur of an angel 
 stamp 'd in gold ; but that 's insculp 'd upon . 
 but here an angel in a golden bed 
 lie all within . deliv me the key ; 
 here do i choos , and thrive i as i may ! 
 portia . there , take it , princ , and if my form lie there , 
 then i am your . [ he open the golden casket ] 
 princ of morocco . o hell ! what have we here ? 
 a carrion death , within whose empti eye 
 there is a written scroll ! i 'll read the write . 
 'all that glister is not gold , 
 often have you heard that told ; 
 mani a man hi life hath sold 
 but my outsid to behold . 
 gild tomb do worm infold . 
 had you been as wise as bold , 
 young in limb , in judgment old , 
 your answer had not been inscrol 'd . 
 fare you well , your suit is cold . ' 
 cold inde , and labour lost , 
 then farewel , heat , and welcom , frost . 
 portia , adieu ! i have too griev 'd a heart 
 to take a tediou leav ; thu loser part . 
 exit with hi train . flourish of cornet 
 portia . a gentl riddanc . draw the curtain , go . 
 let all of hi complexion choos me so . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene viii . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter salerio and solanio 
 
 salerio . whi , man , i saw bassanio under sail ; 
 with him is gratiano gone along ; 
 and in their ship i am sure lorenzo is not . 
 solanio . the villain jew with outcri rai 'd the duke , 
 who went with him to search bassanio 's ship . 
 salerio . he came too late , the ship wa under sail ; 
 but there the duke wa given to understand 
 that in a gondola were seen togeth 
 lorenzo and hi amor jessica ; 
 besid , antonio certifi the duke 
 they were not with bassanio in hi ship . 
 solanio . i never heard a passion so confu 'd , 
 so strang , outrag , and so variabl , 
 as the dog jew did utter in the street . 
 'mi daughter ! o my ducat ! o my daughter ! 
 fled with a christian ! o my christian ducat ! 
 justic ! the law ! my ducat and my daughter ! 
 a seal bag , two seal bag of ducat , 
 of doubl ducat , stol'n from me by my daughter ! 
 and jewels- two stone , two rich and preciou stone , 
 stol'n by my daughter ! justic ! find the girl ; 
 she hath the stone upon her and the ducat . ' 
 salerio . whi , all the boy in venic follow him , 
 cri , hi stone , hi daughter , and hi ducat . 
 solanio . let good antonio look he keep hi day , 
 or he shall pay for thi . 
 salerio . marri , well rememb'r ; 
 i reason 'd with a frenchman yesterday , 
 who told me , in the narrow sea that part 
 the french and english , there miscarri 
 a vessel of our countri richli fraught . 
 i thought upon antonio when he told me , 
 and wish 'd in silenc that it were not hi . 
 solanio . you were best to tell antonio what you hear ; 
 yet do not suddenli , for it may griev him . 
 salerio . a kinder gentleman tread not the earth . 
 i saw bassanio and antonio part . 
 bassanio told him he would make some speed 
 of hi return . he answer 'do not so ; 
 slubber not busi for my sake , bassanio , 
 but stay the veri ripe of the time ; 
 and for the jew 's bond which he hath of me , 
 let it not enter in your mind of love ; 
 be merri , and employ your chiefest thought 
 to courtship , and such fair ostent of love 
 as shall conveni becom you there . ' 
 and even there , hi eye be big with tear , 
 turn hi face , he put hi hand behind him , 
 and with affect wondrou sensibl 
 he wrung bassanio 's hand ; and so they part . 
 solanio . i think he onli love the world for him . 
 i pray thee , let us go and find him out , 
 and quicken hi embrac heavi 
 with some delight or other . 
 salerio . do we so . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ix . 
 belmont . portia 's hous 
 
 enter nerissa , and a servitor 
 
 nerissa . quick , quick , i pray thee , draw the curtain straight ; 
 the princ of arragon hath ta'en hi oath , 
 and come to hi elect present . 
 
 flourish of cornet . enter the princ of arragon , 
 portia , and their train 
 
 portia . behold , there stand the casket , nobl princ . 
 if you choos that wherein i am contain 'd , 
 straight shall our nuptial rite be solemniz 'd ; 
 but if you fail , without more speech , my lord , 
 you must be gone from henc immedi . 
 arragon . i am enjoin 'd by oath to observ three thing : 
 first , never to unfold to ani one 
 which casket 't wa i chose ; next , if i fail 
 of the right casket , never in my life 
 to woo a maid in way of marriag ; 
 lastli , 
 if i do fail in fortun of my choic , 
 immedi to leav you and be gone . 
 portia . to these injunct everi one doth swear 
 that come to hazard for my worthless self . 
 arragon . and so have i address 'd me . fortun now 
 to my heart 's hope ! gold , silver , and base lead . 
 'who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath . ' 
 you shall look fairer ere i give or hazard . 
 what say the golden chest ? ha ! let me see : 
 'who chooseth me shall gain what mani men desir . ' 
 what mani men desire- that 'mani ' may be meant 
 by the fool multitud , that choos by show , 
 not learn more than the fond eye doth teach ; 
 which pri not to th ' interior , but , like the martlet , 
 build in the weather on the outward wall , 
 even in the forc and road of casualti . 
 i will not choos what mani men desir , 
 becaus i will not jump with common spirit 
 and rank me with the barbar multitud . 
 whi , then to thee , thou silver treasure-hous ! 
 tell me onc more what titl thou dost bear . 
 'who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserv . ' 
 and well said too ; for who shall go about 
 to cozen fortun , and be honour 
 without the stamp of merit ? let none presum 
 to wear an undeserv digniti . 
 o that estat , degre , and offic , 
 were not deriv 'd corruptli , and that clear honour 
 were purcha 'd by the merit of the wearer ! 
 how mani then should cover that stand bare ! 
 how mani be command that command ! 
 how much low peasantri would then be glean 
 from the true seed of honour ! and how much honour 
 pick 'd from the chaff and ruin of the time , 
 to be new varnish 'd ! well , but to my choic . 
 'who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserv . ' 
 i will assum desert . give me a key for thi , 
 and instantli unlock my fortun here . 
 [ he open the silver casket ] 
 portia . [ asid ] too long a paus for that which you find there . 
 arragon . what 's here ? the portrait of a blink idiot 
 present me a schedul ! i will read it . 
 how much unlik art thou to portia ! 
 how much unlik my hope and my deserv ! 
 'who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserv . ' 
 did i deserv no more than a fool 's head ? 
 is that my prize ? are my desert no better ? 
 portia . to offend and judg are distinct offic 
 and of oppos natur . 
 arragon . what is here ? [ read ] 
 
 'the fire seven time tri thi ; 
 seven time tri that judgment is 
 that did never choos amiss . 
 some there be that shadow kiss , 
 such have but a shadow 's bliss . 
 there be fool aliv iwi 
 silver 'd o'er , and so wa thi . 
 take what wife you will to bed , 
 i will ever be your head . 
 so be gone ; you are sped . ' 
 
 still more fool i shall appear 
 by the time i linger here . 
 with one fool 's head i came to woo , 
 but i go away with two . 
 sweet , adieu ! i 'll keep my oath , 
 patient to bear my wroth . exit with hi train 
 
 portia . thu hath the candl sing 'd the moth . 
 o , these deliber fool ! when they do choos , 
 they have the wisdom by their wit to lose . 
 nerissa . the ancient say is no heresi : 
 hang and wive goe by destini . 
 portia . come , draw the curtain , nerissa . 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 servant . where is my ladi ? 
 portia . here ; what would my lord ? 
 servant . madam , there is alight at your gate 
 a young venetian , one that come befor 
 to signifi th ' approach of hi lord , 
 from whom he bringeth sensibl regreet ; 
 to wit , besid commend and courteou breath , 
 gift of rich valu . yet i have not seen 
 so like an ambassador of love . 
 a day in april never came so sweet 
 to show how costli summer wa at hand 
 as thi fore-spurr come befor hi lord . 
 portia . no more , i pray thee ; i am half afeard 
 thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee , 
 thou spend'st such high-day wit in prais him . 
 come , come , nerissa , for i long to see 
 quick cupid 's post that come so mannerli . 
 nerissa . bassanio , lord love , if thi will it be ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter solanio and salerio 
 
 solanio . now , what news on the rialto ? 
 salerio . whi , yet it live there uncheck 'd that antonio hath a ship 
 of rich lade wreck 'd on the narrow sea ; the goodwin i think 
 they call the place , a veri danger flat and fatal , where the 
 carcas of mani a tall ship lie buri , as they say , if my 
 gossip report be an honest woman of her word . 
 solanio . i would she were as lie a gossip in that as ever knapp 'd 
 ginger or made her neighbour believ she wept for the death of a 
 third husband . but it is true , without ani slip of prolix or 
 cross the plain highway of talk , that the good antonio , the 
 honest antonio- o that i had a titl good enough to keep hi name 
 compani ! - 
 salerio . come , the full stop . 
 solanio . ha ! what sayest thou ? whi , the end is , he hath lost a 
 ship . 
 salerio . i would it might prove the end of hi loss . 
 solanio . let me say amen betim , lest the devil cross my prayer , 
 for here he come in the like of a jew . 
 
 enter shylock 
 
 how now , shylock ? what news among the merchant ? 
 shylock . you knew , none so well , none so well as you , of my 
 daughter 's flight . 
 salerio . that 's certain ; i , for my part , knew the tailor that made 
 the wing she flew withal . 
 solanio . and shylock , for hi own part , knew the bird wa flidg ; 
 and then it is the complexion of them all to leav the dam . 
 shylock . she is damn 'd for it . 
 salerio . that 's certain , if the devil may be her judg . 
 shylock . my own flesh and blood to rebel ! 
 solanio . out upon it , old carrion ! rebel it at these year ? 
 shylock . i say my daughter is my flesh and my blood . 
 salerio . there is more differ between thi flesh and her than 
 between jet and ivori ; more between your blood than there is 
 between red wine and rhenish . but tell us , do you hear whether 
 antonio have had ani loss at sea or no ? 
 shylock . there i have anoth bad match : a bankrupt , a prodig , 
 who dare scarc show hi head on the rialto ; a beggar , that wa 
 us 'd to come so smug upon the mart . let him look to hi bond . he 
 wa wont to call me usur ; let him look to hi bond . he wa wont 
 to lend money for a christian courtesi ; let him look to hi bond . 
 salerio . whi , i am sure , if he forfeit , thou wilt not take hi 
 flesh . what 's that good for ? 
 shylock . to bait fish withal . if it will feed noth els , it will 
 feed my reveng . he hath disgrac 'd me and hind'r me half a 
 million ; laugh 'd at my loss , mock 'd at my gain , scorn my 
 nation , thwart my bargain , cool my friend , heat mine 
 enemi . and what 's hi reason ? i am a jew . hath not a jew eye ? 
 hath not a jew hand , organ , dimens , sens , affect , 
 passion , fed with the same food , hurt with the same weapon , 
 subject to the same diseas , heal by the same mean , warm 
 and cool by the same winter and summer , as a christian is ? if 
 you prick us , do we not bleed ? if you tickl us , do we not laugh ? 
 if you poison us , do we not die ? and if you wrong us , shall we 
 not reveng ? if we are like you in the rest , we will resembl you 
 in that . if a jew wrong a christian , what is hi humil ? 
 reveng . if a christian wrong a jew , what should hi suffer 
 be by christian exampl ? whi , reveng . the villaini you teach me 
 i will execut ; and itshal go hard but i will better the 
 instruct . 
 
 enter a man from antonio 
 
 man . gentlemen , my master antonio is at hi hous , and desir to 
 speak with you both . 
 salerio . we have been up and down to seek him . 
 
 enter tubal 
 
 solanio . here come anoth of the tribe ; a third can not be 
 match 'd , unless the devil himself turn jew . 
 exeunt solanio , salerio , and man 
 shylock . how now , tubal , what news from genoa ? hast thou found my 
 daughter ? 
 tubal . i often came where i did hear of her , but can not find her . 
 shylock . whi there , there , there , there ! a diamond gone , cost me 
 two thousand ducat in frankfort ! the curs never fell upon our 
 nation till now ; i never felt it till now . two thousand ducat in 
 that , and other preciou , preciou jewel . i would my daughter 
 were dead at my foot , and the jewel in her ear ; would she were 
 hear 'd at my foot , and the ducat in her coffin ! no news of 
 them ? whi , so- and i know not what 's spent in the search . whi , 
 thou- loss upon loss ! the thief gone with so much , and so much to 
 find the thief ; and no satisfact , no reveng ; nor no ill luck 
 stir but what light o ' my shoulder ; no sigh but o ' my 
 breath ; no tear but o ' my shed ! 
 tubal . ye , other men have ill luck too : antonio , as i heard in 
 genoa- 
 shylock . what , what , what ? ill luck , ill luck ? 
 tubal . hath an argosi cast away come from tripoli . 
 shylock . i thank god , i thank god . is it true , is it true ? 
 tubal . i spoke with some of the sailor that escap the wreck . 
 shylock . i thank thee , good tubal . good news , good news- ha , ha ! - 
 heard in genoa . 
 tubal . your daughter spent in genoa , as i heard , one night , 
 fourscor ducat . 
 shylock . thou stick'st a dagger in me- i shall never see my gold 
 again . fourscor ducat at a sit ! fourscor ducat ! 
 tubal . there came diver of antonio 's creditor in my compani to 
 venic that swear he can not choos but break . 
 shylock . i am veri glad of it ; i 'll plagu him , i 'll tortur him ; i 
 am glad of it . 
 tubal . one of them show me a ring that he had of your daughter 
 for a monkey . 
 shylock . out upon her ! thou torturest me , tubal . it wa my 
 turquois ; i had it of leah when i wa a bachelor ; i would not 
 have given it for a wilder of monkey . 
 tubal . but antonio is certainli undon . 
 shylock . nay , that 's true ; that 's veri true . go , tubal , fee me an 
 offic ; bespeak him a fortnight befor . i will have the heart of 
 him , if he forfeit ; for , were he out of venic , i can make what 
 merchandis i will . go , tubal , and meet me at our synagogu ; go , 
 good tubal ; at our synagogu , tubal . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 belmont . portia 's hous 
 
 enter bassanio , portia , gratiano , nerissa , and all their train 
 
 portia . i pray you tarri ; paus a day or two 
 befor you hazard ; for , in choos wrong , 
 i lose your compani ; therefor forbear a while . 
 there 's someth tell me- but it is not love- 
 i would not lose you ; and you know yourself 
 hate counsel not in such a qualiti . 
 but lest you should not understand me well- 
 and yet a maiden hath no tongu but thought- 
 i would detain you here some month or two 
 befor you ventur for me . i could teach you 
 how to choos right , but then i am forsworn ; 
 so will i never be ; so may you miss me ; 
 but if you do , you 'll make me wish a sin , 
 that i had been forsworn . beshrew your eye ! 
 they have o'erlook 'd me and divid me ; 
 one half of me is your , the other half yours- 
 mine own , i would say ; but if mine , then your , 
 and so all your . o ! these naughti time 
 put bar between the owner and their right ; 
 and so , though your , not your . prove it so , 
 let fortun go to hell for it , not i . 
 i speak too long , but 't is to peiz the time , 
 to eke it , and to draw it out in length , 
 to stay you from elect . 
 bassanio . let me choos ; 
 for as i am , i live upon the rack . 
 portia . upon the rack , bassanio ? then confess 
 what treason there is mingl with your love . 
 bassanio . none but that ugli treason of mistrust 
 which make me fear th ' enjoy of my love ; 
 there may as well be amiti and life 
 'tween snow and fire as treason and my love . 
 portia . ay , but i fear you speak upon the rack , 
 where men enforc do speak anyth . 
 bassanio . promis me life , and i 'll confess the truth . 
 portia . well then , confess and live . 
 bassanio . 'confess ' and 'love ' 
 had been the veri sum of my confess . 
 o happi torment , when my tortur 
 doth teach me answer for deliver ! 
 but let me to my fortun and the casket . 
 portia . away , then ; i am lock 'd in one of them . 
 if you do love me , you will find me out . 
 nerissa and the rest , stand all aloof ; 
 let music sound while he doth make hi choic ; 
 then , if he lose , he make a swan-lik end , 
 fade in music . that the comparison 
 may stand more proper , my eye shall be the stream 
 and wat'ri death-b for him . he may win ; 
 and what is music then ? then music is 
 even as the flourish when true subject bow 
 to a new-crown monarch ; such it is 
 as are those dulcet sound in break of day 
 that creep into the dream bridegroom 's ear 
 and summon him to marriag . now he goe , 
 with no less presenc , but with much more love , 
 than young alcid when he did redeem 
 the virgin tribut paid by howl troy 
 to the sea-monst . i stand for sacrific ; 
 the rest aloof are the dardanian wive , 
 with blear visag come forth to view 
 the issu of th ' exploit . go , hercul ! 
 live thou , i live . with much much more dismay 
 i view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray . 
 
 a song 
 
 the whilst bassanio comment on the casket to himself 
 
 tell me where is fanci bred , 
 or in the heart or in the head , 
 how begot , how nourish ? 
 repli , repli . 
 it is engend'r in the eye , 
 with gaze fed ; and fanci die 
 in the cradl where it lie . 
 let us all ring fanci 's knell : 
 i 'll begin it- ding , dong , bell . 
 all . ding , dong , bell . 
 
 bassanio . so may the outward show be least themselv ; 
 the world is still deceiv 'd with ornament . 
 in law , what plea so taint and corrupt 
 but , be season 'd with a graciou voic , 
 obscur the show of evil ? in religion , 
 what damn error but some sober brow 
 will bless it , and approv it with a text , 
 hide the gross with fair ornament ? 
 there is no vice so simpl but assum 
 some mark of virtu on hi outward part . 
 how mani coward , whose heart are all as fals 
 as stair of sand , wear yet upon their chin 
 the beard of hercul and frown mar ; 
 who , inward search 'd , have liver white as milk ! 
 and these assum but valour 's excrement 
 to render them redoubt . look on beauti 
 and you shall see 't is purcha 'd by the weight , 
 which therein work a miracl in natur , 
 make them lightest that wear most of it ; 
 so are those crisp snaki golden lock 
 which make such wanton gambol with the wind 
 upon suppos fair often known 
 to be the dowri of a second head- 
 the skull that bred them in the sepulchr . 
 thu ornament is but the guil shore 
 to a most danger sea ; the beauteou scarf 
 veil an indian beauti ; in a word , 
 the seem truth which cun time put on 
 to entrap the wisest . therefor , thou gaudi gold , 
 hard food for mida , i will none of thee ; 
 nor none of thee , thou pale and common drudg 
 'tween man and man ; but thou , thou meagr lead , 
 which rather threaten'st than dost promis aught , 
 thi plain move me more than eloqu , 
 and here choos i. joy be the consequ ! 
 portia . [ asid ] how all the other passion fleet to air , 
 as doubt thought , and rash-embrac 'd despair , 
 and shudd'r fear , and green-ey 'd jealousi ! 
 o love , be moder , allay thi ecstasi , 
 in measur rain thi joy , scant thi excess ! 
 i feel too much thi bless . make it less , 
 for fear i surfeit . 
 bassanio . [ open the leaden casket ] what find i here ? 
 fair portia 's counterfeit ! what demi-god 
 hath come so near creation ? move these eye ? 
 or whether ride on the ball of mine 
 seem they in motion ? here are sever 'd lip , 
 part with sugar breath ; so sweet a bar 
 should sunder such sweet friend . here in her hair 
 the painter play the spider , and hath woven 
 a golden mesh t ' entrap the heart of men 
 faster than gnat in cobweb . but her eyes- 
 how could he see to do them ? have made one , 
 methink it should have power to steal both hi , 
 and leav itself unfurnish 'd . yet look how far 
 the substanc of my prais doth wrong thi shadow 
 in underpr it , so far thi shadow 
 doth limp behind the substanc . here 's the scroll , 
 the contin and summari of my fortun . 
 'you that choos not by the view , 
 chanc as fair and choos as true ! 
 sinc thi fortun fall to you , 
 be content and seek no new . 
 if you be well plea 'd with thi , 
 and hold your fortun for your bliss , 
 turn to where your ladi is 
 and claim her with a love kiss . ' 
 a gentl scroll . fair ladi , by your leav ; 
 i come by note , to give and to receiv . 
 like one of two contend in a prize , 
 that think he hath done well in peopl 's eye , 
 hear applaus and univers shout , 
 giddi in spirit , still gaze in a doubt 
 whether those peal of prais be hi or no ; 
 so , thrice-fair ladi , stand i even so , 
 as doubt whether what i see be true , 
 until confirm 'd , sign 'd , ratifi by you . 
 portia . you see me , lord bassanio , where i stand , 
 such as i am . though for myself alon 
 i would not be ambiti in my wish 
 to wish myself much better , yet for you 
 i would be trebl twenti time myself , 
 a thousand time more fair , ten thousand time more rich , 
 that onli to stand high in your account 
 i might in virtu , beauti , live , friend , 
 exceed account . but the full sum of me 
 is sum of someth which , to term in gross , 
 is an unlesson 'd girl , unschool 'd , unpracti 'd ; 
 happi in thi , she is not yet so old 
 but she may learn ; happier than thi , 
 she is not bred so dull but she can learn ; 
 happiest of all is that her gentl spirit 
 commit itself to your to be direct , 
 as from her lord , her governor , her king . 
 myself and what is mine to you and your 
 is now convert . but now i wa the lord 
 of thi fair mansion , master of my servant , 
 queen o'er myself ; and even now , but now , 
 thi hous , these servant , and thi same myself , 
 are yours- my lord 's . i give them with thi ring , 
 which when you part from , lose , or give away , 
 let it presag the ruin of your love , 
 and be my vantag to exclaim on you . 
 bassanio . madam , you have bereft me of all word ; 
 onli my blood speak to you in my vein ; 
 and there is such confus in my power 
 as , after some orat fairli spoke 
 by a belov princ , there doth appear 
 among the buzz pleas multitud , 
 where everi someth , be blent togeth , 
 turn to a wild of noth , save of joy 
 express 'd and not express 'd . but when thi ring 
 part from thi finger , then part life from henc ; 
 o , then be bold to say bassanio 's dead ! 
 nerissa . my lord and ladi , it is now our time 
 that have stood by and seen our wish prosper 
 to cri 'good joy . ' good joy , my lord and ladi ! 
 gratiano . my lord bassanio , and my gentl ladi , 
 i wish you all the joy that you can wish , 
 for i am sure you can wish none from me ; 
 and , when your honour mean to solemn 
 the bargain of your faith , i do beseech you 
 even at that time i may be marri too . 
 bassanio . with all my heart , so thou canst get a wife . 
 gratiano . i thank your lordship , you have got me one . 
 my eye , my lord , can look as swift as your : 
 you saw the mistress , i beheld the maid ; 
 you lov 'd , i lov 'd ; for intermiss 
 no more pertain to me , my lord , than you . 
 your fortun stood upon the casket there , 
 and so did mine too , as the matter fall ; 
 for woo here until i sweat again , 
 and swear till my veri roof wa dri 
 with oath of love , at last- if promis last- 
 i got a promis of thi fair one here 
 to have her love , provid that your fortun 
 achiev 'd her mistress . 
 portia . is thi true , nerissa ? 
 nerissa . madam , it is , so you stand plea 'd withal . 
 bassanio . and do you , gratiano , mean good faith ? 
 gratiano . ye , faith , my lord . 
 bassanio . our feast shall be much honour in your marriag . 
 gratiano . we 'll play with them : the first boy for a thousand 
 ducat . 
 nerissa . what , and stake down ? 
 gratiano . no ; we shall ne'er win at that sport , and stake down- 
 but who come here ? lorenzo and hi infidel ? 
 what , and my old venetian friend , salerio ! 
 
 enter lorenzo , jessica , and salerio , a messeng 
 from venic 
 
 bassanio . lorenzo and salerio , welcom hither , 
 if that the youth of my new int'rest here 
 have power to bid you welcom . by your leav , 
 i bid my veri friend and countrymen , 
 sweet portia , welcom . 
 portia . so do i , my lord ; 
 they are entir welcom . 
 lorenzo . i thank your honour . for my part , my lord , 
 my purpos wa not to have seen you here ; 
 but meet with salerio by the way , 
 he did entreat me , past all say nay , 
 to come with him along . 
 salerio . i did , my lord , 
 and i have reason for it . signior antonio 
 commend him to you . [ give bassanio a letter ] 
 bassanio . ere i ope hi letter , 
 i pray you tell me how my good friend doth . 
 salerio . not sick , my lord , unless it be in mind ; 
 nor well , unless in mind ; hi letter there 
 will show you hi estat . [ bassanio open the letter ] 
 gratiano . nerissa , cheer yond stranger ; bid her welcom . 
 your hand , salerio . what 's the news from venic ? 
 how doth that royal merchant , good antonio ? 
 i know he will be glad of our success : 
 we are the jason , we have won the fleec . 
 salerio . i would you had won the fleec that he hath lost . 
 portia . there are some shrewd content in yond same paper 
 that steal the colour from bassanio 's cheek : 
 some dear friend dead , els noth in the world 
 could turn so much the constitut 
 of ani constant man . what , wors and wors ! 
 with leav , bassanio : i am half yourself , 
 and i must freeli have the half of anyth 
 that thi same paper bring you . 
 bassanio . o sweet portia , 
 here are a few of the unpleasant'st word 
 that ever blot paper ! gentl ladi , 
 when i did first impart my love to you , 
 i freeli told you all the wealth i had 
 ran in my veins- i wa a gentleman ; 
 and then i told you true . and yet , dear ladi , 
 rate myself at noth , you shall see 
 how much i wa a braggart . when i told you 
 my state wa noth , i should then have told you 
 that i wa wors than noth ; for inde 
 i have engag 'd myself to a dear friend , 
 engag 'd my friend to hi mere enemi , 
 to feed my mean . here is a letter , ladi , 
 the paper as the bodi of my friend , 
 and everi word in it a gape wound 
 issu life-blood . but is it true , salerio ? 
 hath all hi ventur fail 'd ? what , not one hit ? 
 from tripoli , from mexico , and england , 
 from lisbon , barbari , and india , 
 and not one vessel scape the dread touch 
 of merchant-mar rock ? 
 salerio . not one , my lord . 
 besid , it should appear that , if he had 
 the present money to discharg the jew , 
 he would not take it . never did i know 
 a creatur that did bear the shape of man 
 so keen and greedi to confound a man . 
 he pli the duke at morn and at night , 
 and doth impeach the freedom of the state , 
 if they deni him justic . twenti merchant , 
 the duke himself , and the magnifico 
 of greatest port , have all persuad with him ; 
 but none can drive him from the enviou plea 
 of forfeitur , of justic , and hi bond . 
 jessica . when i wa with him , i have heard him swear 
 to tubal and to chu , hi countrymen , 
 that he would rather have antonio 's flesh 
 than twenti time the valu of the sum 
 that he did owe him ; and i know , my lord , 
 if law , author , and power , deni not , 
 it will go hard with poor antonio . 
 portia . is it your dear friend that is thu in troubl ? 
 bassanio . the dearest friend to me , the kindest man , 
 the best condit 'd and unweari spirit 
 in do courtesi ; and one in whom 
 the ancient roman honour more appear 
 than ani that draw breath in itali . 
 portia . what sum owe he the jew ? 
 bassanio . for me , three thousand ducat . 
 portia . what ! no more ? 
 pay him six thousand , and defac the bond ; 
 doubl six thousand , and then trebl that , 
 befor a friend of thi descript 
 shall lose a hair through bassanio 's fault . 
 first go with me to church and call me wife , 
 and then away to venic to your friend ; 
 for never shall you lie by portia 's side 
 with an unquiet soul . you shall have gold 
 to pay the petti debt twenti time over . 
 when it is paid , bring your true friend along . 
 my maid nerissa and myself meantim 
 will live as maid and widow . come , away ; 
 for you shall henc upon your wed day . 
 bid your friend welcom , show a merri cheer ; 
 sinc you are dear bought , i will love you dear . 
 but let me hear the letter of your friend . 
 bassanio . [ read ] 'sweet bassanio , my ship have all miscarri , 
 my creditor grow cruel , my estat is veri low , my bond to the 
 jew is forfeit ; and sinc , in pay it , it is imposs i 
 should live , all debt are clear 'd between you and i , if i might 
 but see you at my death . notwithstand , use your pleasur ; if 
 your love do not persuad you to come , let not my letter . ' 
 portia . o love , dispatch all busi and be gone ! 
 bassanio . sinc i have your good leav to go away , 
 i will make hast ; but , till i come again , 
 no bed shall e'er be guilti of my stay , 
 nor rest be interpos 'twixt us twain . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter shylock , solanio , antonio , and gaoler 
 
 shylock . gaoler , look to him . tell not me of mercy- 
 thi is the fool that lent out money grati . 
 gaoler , look to him . 
 antonio . hear me yet , good shylock . 
 shylock . i 'll have my bond ; speak not against my bond . 
 i have sworn an oath that i will have my bond . 
 thou call'dst me dog befor thou hadst a caus , 
 but , sinc i am a dog , bewar my fang ; 
 the duke shall grant me justic . i do wonder , 
 thou naughti gaoler , that thou art so fond 
 to come abroad with him at hi request . 
 antonio . i pray thee hear me speak . 
 shylock . i 'll have my bond . i will not hear thee speak ; 
 i 'll have my bond ; and therefor speak no more . 
 i 'll not be made a soft and dull-ey 'd fool , 
 to shake the head , relent , and sigh , and yield , 
 to christian intercessor . follow not ; 
 i 'll have no speak ; i will have my bond . exit 
 solanio . it is the most impenetr cur 
 that ever kept with men . 
 antonio . let him alon ; 
 i 'll follow him no more with bootless prayer . 
 he seek my life ; hi reason well i know : 
 i oft deliv 'd from hi forfeitur 
 mani that have at time made moan to me ; 
 therefor he hate me . 
 solanio . i am sure the duke 
 will never grant thi forfeitur to hold . 
 antonio . the duke can not deni the cours of law ; 
 for the commod that stranger have 
 with us in venic , if it be deni , 
 will much impeach the justic of the state , 
 sinc that the trade and profit of the citi 
 consisteth of all nation . therefor , go ; 
 these grief and loss have so bate me 
 that i shall hardli spare a pound of flesh 
 to-morrow to my bloodi creditor . 
 well , gaoler , on ; pray god bassanio come 
 to see me pay hi debt , and then i care not . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 belmont . portia 's hous 
 
 enter portia , nerissa , lorenzo , jessica , and balthasar 
 
 lorenzo . madam , although i speak it in your presenc , 
 you have a nobl and a true conceit 
 of godlik amiti , which appear most strongli 
 in bear thu the absenc of your lord . 
 but if you knew to whom you show thi honour , 
 how true a gentleman you send relief , 
 how dear a lover of my lord your husband , 
 i know you would be prouder of the work 
 than customari bounti can enforc you . 
 portia . i never did repent for do good , 
 nor shall not now ; for in companion 
 that do convers and wast the time togeth , 
 whose soul do bear an equal yoke of love , 
 there must be need a like proport 
 of lineament , of manner , and of spirit , 
 which make me think that thi antonio , 
 be the bosom lover of my lord , 
 must need be like my lord . if it be so , 
 how littl is the cost i have bestow 
 in purchas the semblanc of my soul 
 from out the state of hellish cruelti ! 
 thi come too near the prais of myself ; 
 therefor , no more of it ; hear other thing . 
 lorenzo , i commit into your hand 
 the husbandri and manag of my hous 
 until my lord 's return ; for mine own part , 
 i have toward heaven breath 'd a secret vow 
 to live in prayer and contempl , 
 onli attend by nerissa here , 
 until her husband and my lord 's return . 
 there is a monasteri two mile off , 
 and there we will abid . i do desir you 
 not to deni thi imposit , 
 the which my love and some necess 
 now lay upon you . 
 lorenzo . madam , with all my heart 
 i shall obey you in an fair command . 
 portia . my peopl do alreadi know my mind , 
 and will acknowledg you and jessica 
 in place of lord bassanio and myself . 
 so fare you well till we shall meet again . 
 lorenzo . fair thought and happi hour attend on you ! 
 jessica . i wish your ladyship all heart 's content . 
 portia . i thank you for your wish , and am well plea 'd 
 to wish it back on you . fare you well , jessica . 
 exeunt jessica and lorenzo 
 now , balthasar , 
 as i have ever found thee honest-tru , 
 so let me find thee still . take thi same letter , 
 and use thou all th ' endeavour of a man 
 in speed to padua ; see thou render thi 
 into my cousin 's hand , doctor bellario ; 
 and look what note and garment he doth give thee , 
 bring them , i pray thee , with imagin 'd speed 
 unto the traject , to the common ferri 
 which trade to venic . wast no time in word , 
 but get thee gone ; i shall be there befor thee . 
 balthasar . madam , i go with all conveni speed . exit 
 portia . come on , nerissa , i have work in hand 
 that you yet know not of ; we 'll see our husband 
 befor they think of us . 
 nerissa . shall they see us ? 
 portia . they shall , nerissa ; but in such a habit 
 that they shall think we are accomplish 
 with that we lack . i 'll hold thee ani wager , 
 when we are both accoutr like young men , 
 i 'll prove the prettier fellow of the two , 
 and wear my dagger with the braver grace , 
 and speak between the chang of man and boy 
 with a reed voic ; and turn two minc step 
 into a manli stride ; and speak of fray 
 like a fine brag youth ; and tell quaint lie , 
 how honour ladi sought my love , 
 which i deni , they fell sick and died- 
 i could not do withal . then i 'll repent , 
 and wish for all that , that i had not kill 'd them . 
 and twenti of these puni lie i 'll tell , 
 that men shall swear i have discontinu school 
 about a twelvemonth . i have within my mind 
 a thousand raw trick of these brag jack , 
 which i will practis . 
 nerissa . whi , shall we turn to men ? 
 portia . fie , what a question 's that , 
 if thou wert near a lewd interpret ! 
 but come , i 'll tell thee all my whole devic 
 when i am in my coach , which stay for us 
 at the park gate ; and therefor hast away , 
 for we must measur twenti mile to-day . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 belmont . the garden 
 
 enter launcelot and jessica 
 
 launcelot . ye , truli ; for , look you , the sin of the father are to 
 be laid upon the children ; therefor , i promis you , i fear you . 
 i wa alway plain with you , and so now i speak my agit of 
 the matter ; therefor be o ' good cheer , for truli i think you are 
 damn 'd . there is but one hope in it that can do you ani good , and 
 that is but a kind of bastard hope , neither . 
 jessica . and what hope is that , i pray thee ? 
 launcelot . marri , you may partli hope that your father got you not- 
 that you are not the jew 's daughter . 
 jessica . that were a kind of bastard hope inde ; so the sin of my 
 mother should be visit upon me . 
 launcelot . truli then i fear you are damn 'd both by father and 
 mother ; thu when i shun scylla , your father , i fall into 
 charybdi , your mother ; well , you are gone both way . 
 jessica . i shall be sav 'd by my husband ; he hath made me a 
 christian . 
 launcelot . truli , the more to blame he ; we were christian enow 
 befor , e'en as mani as could well live one by anoth . thi 
 make of christian will rais the price of hog ; if we grow all 
 to be pork-eat , we shall not shortli have a rasher on the 
 coal for money . 
 
 enter lorenzo 
 
 jessica . i 'll tell my husband , launcelot , what you say ; here he 
 come . 
 lorenzo . i shall grow jealou of you shortli , launcelot , if you 
 thu get my wife into corner . 
 jessica . nay , you need nor fear us , lorenzo ; launcelot and i are 
 out ; he tell me flatli there 's no merci for me in heaven , 
 becaus i am a jew 's daughter ; and he say you are no good member 
 of the commonwealth , for in convert jew to christian you 
 rais the price of pork . 
 lorenzo . i shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you 
 can the get up of the negro 's belli ; the moor is with child 
 by you , launcelot . 
 launcelot . it is much that the moor should be more than reason ; but 
 if she be less than an honest woman , she is inde more than i 
 took her for . 
 lorenzo . how everi fool can play upon the word ! i think the best 
 grace of wit will shortli turn into silenc , and discours grow 
 commend in none onli but parrot . go in , sirrah ; bid them 
 prepar for dinner . 
 launcelot . that is done , sir ; they have all stomach . 
 lorenzo . goodli lord , what a wit-snapp are you ! then bid them 
 prepar dinner . 
 launcelot . that is done too , sir , onli 'cover ' is the word . 
 lorenzo . will you cover , then , sir ? 
 launcelot . not so , sir , neither ; i know my duti . 
 lorenzo . yet more quarrel with occas ! wilt thou show the 
 whole wealth of thi wit in an instant ? i pray thee understand a 
 plain man in hi plain mean : go to thi fellow , bid them cover 
 the tabl , serv in the meat , and we will come in to dinner . 
 launcelot . for the tabl , sir , it shall be serv 'd in ; for the meat , 
 sir , it shall be cover 'd ; for your come in to dinner , sir , whi , 
 let it be as humour and conceit shall govern . 
 exit 
 lorenzo . o dear discret , how hi word are suit ! 
 the fool hath plant in hi memori 
 an armi of good word ; and i do know 
 a mani fool that stand in better place , 
 garnish 'd like him , that for a tricksi word 
 defi the matter . how cheer'st thou , jessica ? 
 and now , good sweet , say thi opinion , 
 how dost thou like the lord bassanio 's wife ? 
 jessica . past all express . it is veri meet 
 the lord bassanio live an upright life , 
 for , have such a bless in hi ladi , 
 he find the joy of heaven here on earth ; 
 and if on earth he do not merit it , 
 in reason he should never come to heaven . 
 whi , if two god should play some heavenli match , 
 and on the wager lay two earthli women , 
 and portia one , there must be someth els 
 pawn 'd with the other ; for the poor rude world 
 hath not her fellow . 
 lorenzo . even such a husband 
 hast thou of me as she is for a wife . 
 jessica . nay , but ask my opinion too of that . 
 lorenzo . i will anon ; first let us go to dinner . 
 jessica . nay , let me prais you while i have a stomach . 
 lorenzo . no , pray thee , let it serv for table-talk ; 
 then howsome' thou speak'st , 'mong other thing 
 i shall digest it . 
 jessica . well , i 'll set you forth . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 venic . the court of justic 
 
 enter the duke , the magnifico , antonio , bassanio , gratiano , salerio , 
 and other 
 
 duke of venic . what , is antonio here ? 
 antonio . readi , so pleas your grace . 
 duke of venic . i am sorri for thee ; thou art come to answer 
 a stoni adversari , an inhuman wretch , 
 uncap of piti , void and empti 
 from ani dram of merci . 
 antonio . i have heard 
 your grace hath ta'en great pain to qualifi 
 hi rigor cours ; but sinc he stand obdur , 
 and that no law mean can carri me 
 out of hi envi 's reach , i do oppos 
 my patienc to hi furi , and am arm 'd 
 to suffer with a quiet of spirit 
 the veri tyranni and rage of hi . 
 duke of venic . go one , and call the jew into the court . 
 salerio . he is readi at the door ; he come , my lord . 
 
 enter shylock 
 
 duke of venic . make room , and let him stand befor our face . 
 shylock , the world think , and i think so too , 
 that thou but leadest thi fashion of thi malic 
 to the last hour of act ; and then , 't is thought , 
 thou'lt show thi merci and remors , more strang 
 than is thi strang appar cruelti ; 
 and where thou now exact the penalti , 
 which is a pound of thi poor merchant 's flesh , 
 thou wilt not onli loos the forfeitur , 
 but , touch 'd with human gentl and love , 
 forgiv a moieti of the princip , 
 glanc an eye of piti on hi loss , 
 that have of late so huddl on hi back- 
 enow to press a royal merchant down , 
 and pluck commiser of hi state 
 from brassi bosom and rough heart of flint , 
 from stubborn turk and tartar , never train 'd 
 to offic of tender courtesi . 
 we all expect a gentl answer , jew . 
 shylock . i have possess 'd your grace of what i purpos , 
 and by our holi sabbath have i sworn 
 to have the due and forfeit of my bond . 
 if you deni it , let the danger light 
 upon your charter and your citi 's freedom . 
 you 'll ask me whi i rather choos to have 
 a weight of carrion flesh than to receiv 
 three thousand ducat . i 'll not answer that , 
 but say it is my humour- is it answer 'd ? 
 what if my hous be troubl with a rat , 
 and i be plea 'd to give ten thousand ducat 
 to have it ban 'd ? what , are you answer 'd yet ? 
 some men there are love not a gape pig ; 
 some that are mad if they behold a cat ; 
 and other , when the bagpip sing i ' th ' nose , 
 can not contain their urin ; for affect , 
 mistress of passion , sway it to the mood 
 of what it like or loath . now , for your answer : 
 as there is no firm reason to be rend'r 
 whi he can not abid a gape pig ; 
 whi he , a harmless necessari cat ; 
 whi he , a woollen bagpip , but of forc 
 must yield to such inevit shame 
 as to offend , himself be offend ; 
 so can i give no reason , nor i will not , 
 more than a lodg 'd hate and a certain loath 
 i bear antonio , that i follow thu 
 a lose suit against him . are you answer ? 
 bassanio . thi is no answer , thou unfeel man , 
 to excus the current of thi cruelti . 
 shylock . i am not bound to pleas thee with my answer . 
 bassanio . do all men kill the thing they do not love ? 
 shylock . hate ani man the thing he would not kill ? 
 bassanio . everi offenc is not a hate at first . 
 shylock . what , wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice ? 
 antonio . i pray you , think you question with the jew . 
 you may as well go stand upon the beach 
 and bid the main flood bate hi usual height ; 
 you may as well use question with the wolf , 
 whi he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb ; 
 you may as well forbid the mountain pine 
 to wag their high top and to make no nois 
 when they are fretten with the gust of heaven ; 
 you may as well do anyth most hard 
 as seek to soften that- than which what 's harder ? - 
 hi jewish heart . therefor , i do beseech you , 
 make no moe offer , use no farther mean , 
 but with all brief and plain conveni 
 let me have judgment , and the jew hi will . 
 bassanio . for thi three thousand ducat here is six . 
 shylock . if everi ducat in six thousand ducat 
 were in six part , and everi part a ducat , 
 i would not draw them ; i would have my bond . 
 duke of venic . how shalt thou hope for merci , rend'r none ? 
 shylock . what judgment shall i dread , do no wrong ? 
 you have among you mani a purcha 'd slave , 
 which , fike your ass and your dog and mule , 
 you use in abject and in slavish part , 
 becaus you bought them ; shall i say to you 
 'let them be free , marri them to your heirs- 
 whi sweat they under burden ? - let their bed 
 be made as soft as your , and let their palat 
 be season 'd with such viand ' ? you will answer 
 'the slave are our . ' so do i answer you : 
 the pound of flesh which i demand of him 
 is dearli bought , 't is mine , and i will have it . 
 if you deni me , fie upon your law ! 
 there is no forc in the decre of venic . 
 i stand for judgment ; answer ; shall i have it ? 
 duke of venic . upon my power i may dismiss thi court , 
 unless bellario , a learn doctor , 
 whom i have sent for to determin thi , 
 come here to-day . 
 salerio . my lord , here stay without 
 a messeng with letter from the doctor , 
 new come from padua . 
 duke of venic . bring us the letter ; call the messeng . 
 bassanio . good cheer , antonio ! what , man , courag yet ! 
 the jew shall have my flesh , blood , bone , and all , 
 ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood . 
 antonio . i am a taint wether of the flock , 
 meetest for death ; the weakest kind of fruit 
 drop earliest to the ground , and so let me . 
 you can not better be employ 'd , bassanio , 
 than to live still , and write mine epitaph . 
 
 enter nerissa dress like a lawyer 's clerk 
 
 duke of venic . came you from padua , from bellario ? 
 nerissa . from both , my lord . bellario greet your grace . 
 [ present a letter ] 
 bassanio . whi dost thou whet thi knife so earnestli ? 
 shylock . to cut the forfeitur from that bankrupt there . 
 gratiano . not on thi sole , but on thi soul , harsh jew , 
 thou mak'st thi knife keen ; but no metal can , 
 no , not the hangman 's axe , bear half the keen 
 of thi sharp envi . can no prayer pierc thee ? 
 shylock . no , none that thou hast wit enough to make . 
 gratiano . o , be thou damn 'd , inexecr dog ! 
 and for thi life let justic be accu 'd . 
 thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith , 
 to hold opinion with pythagora 
 that soul of anim infus themselv 
 into the trunk of men . thi currish spirit 
 govern 'd a wolf who , hang 'd for human slaughter , 
 even from the gallow did hi fell soul fleet , 
 and , whilst thou layest in thi unhallow dam , 
 infu 'd itself in thee ; for thi desir 
 are wolfish , bloodi , starv 'd and raven . 
 shylock . till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond , 
 thou but offend'st thi lung to speak so loud ; 
 repair thi wit , good youth , or it will fall 
 to cureless ruin . i stand here for law . 
 duke of venic . thi letter from bellario doth commend 
 a young and learn doctor to our court . 
 where is he ? 
 nerissa . he attendeth here hard by 
 to know your answer , whether you 'll admit him . 
 duke of venic . with all my heart . some three or four of you 
 go give him courteou conduct to thi place . 
 meantim , the court shall hear bellario 's letter . 
 clerk . [ read ] 'your grace shall understand that at the receipt 
 of your letter i am veri sick ; but in the instant that your 
 messeng came , in love visit wa with me a young doctor 
 of rome- hi name is balthazar . i acquaint him with the caus 
 in controversi between the jew and antonio the merchant ; we 
 turn 'd o'er mani book togeth ; he is furnish with my opinion 
 which , better with hi own learning-th great whereof i 
 can not enough commend- come with him at my importun to fill 
 up your grace 's request in my stead . i beseech you let hi lack 
 of year be no impedi to let him lack a reverend estim , 
 for i never knew so young a bodi with so old a head . i leav him 
 to your graciou accept , whose trial shall better publish hi 
 commend . ' 
 
 enter portia for balthazar , dress like a doctor of law 
 
 duke of venic . you hear the learn 'd bellario , what he write ; 
 and here , i take it , is the doctor come . 
 give me your hand ; come you from old bellario ? 
 portia . i did , my lord . 
 duke of venic . you are welcom ; take your place . 
 are you acquaint with the differ 
 that hold thi present question in the court ? 
 portia . i am inform throughli of the caus . 
 which is the merchant here , and which the jew ? 
 duke of venic . antonio and old shylock , both stand forth . 
 portia . is your name shylock ? 
 shylock . shylock is my name . 
 portia . of a strang natur is the suit you follow ; 
 yet in such rule that the venetian law 
 can not impugn you as you do proceed . 
 you stand within hi danger , do you not ? 
 antonio . ay , so he say . 
 portia . do you confess the bond ? 
 antonio . i do . 
 portia . then must the jew be merci . 
 shylock . on what compuls must i ? tell me that . 
 portia . the qualiti of merci is not strain 'd ; 
 it droppeth as the gentl rain from heaven 
 upon the place beneath . it is twice blest : 
 it blesseth him that give and him that take . 
 't is mightiest in the mightiest ; it becom 
 the throne monarch better than hi crown ; 
 hi sceptr show the forc of tempor power , 
 the attribut to awe and majesti , 
 wherein doth sit the dread and fear of king ; 
 but merci is abov thi sceptr sway , 
 it is enthron in the heart of king , 
 it is an attribut to god himself ; 
 and earthli power doth then show likest god 's 
 when merci season justic . therefor , jew , 
 though justic be thi plea , consid this- 
 that in the cours of justic none of us 
 should see salvat ; we do pray for merci , 
 and that same prayer doth teach us all to render 
 the deed of merci . i have spoke thu much 
 to mitig the justic of thi plea , 
 which if thou follow , thi strict court of venic 
 must need give sentenc 'gainst the merchant there . 
 shylock . my deed upon my head ! i crave the law , 
 the penalti and forfeit of my bond . 
 bassanio . ye ; here i tender it for him in the court ; 
 yea , twice the sum ; if that will not suffic , 
 i will be bound to pay it ten time o'er 
 on forfeit of my hand , my head , my heart ; 
 if thi will not suffic , it must appear 
 that malic bear down truth . and , i beseech you , 
 wrest onc the law to your author ; 
 to do a great right do a littl wrong , 
 and curb thi cruel devil of hi will . 
 portia . it must not be ; there is no power in venic 
 can alter a decre establish ; 
 'twill be record for a preced , 
 and mani an error , by the same exampl , 
 will rush into the state ; it can not be . 
 shylock . a daniel come to judgment ! yea , a daniel ! 
 o wise young judg , how i do honour thee ! 
 portia . i pray you , let me look upon the bond . 
 shylock . here 't is , most reverend doctor ; here it is . 
 portia . shylock , there 's thrice thi money off'r thee . 
 shylock . an oath , an oath ! i have an oath in heaven . 
 shall i lay perjuri upon my soul ? 
 no , not for venic . 
 portia . whi , thi bond is forfeit ; 
 and law by thi the jew may claim 
 a pound of flesh , to be by him cut off 
 nearest the merchant 's heart . be merci . 
 take thrice thi money ; bid me tear the bond . 
 shylock . when it is paid accord to the tenour . 
 it doth appear you are a worthi judg ; 
 you know the law ; your exposit 
 hath been most sound ; i charg you by the law , 
 whereof you are a well-deserv pillar , 
 proceed to judgment . by my soul i swear 
 there is no power in the tongu of man 
 to alter me . i stay here on my bond . 
 antonio . most heartili i do beseech the court 
 to give the judgment . 
 portia . whi then , thu it is : 
 you must prepar your bosom for hi knife . 
 shylock . o nobl judg ! o excel young man ! 
 portia . for the intent and purpos of the law 
 hath full relat to the penalti , 
 which here appeareth due upon the bond . 
 shylock . 't is veri true . o wise and upright judg , 
 how much more elder art thou than thi look ! 
 portia . therefor , lay bare your bosom . 
 shylock . ay , hi breast- 
 so say the bond ; doth it not , nobl judg ? 
 'nearest hi heart , ' those are the veri word . 
 portia . it is so . are there balanc here to weigh 
 the flesh ? 
 shylock . i have them readi . 
 portia . have by some surgeon , shylock , on your charg , 
 to stop hi wound , lest he do bleed to death . 
 shylock . is it so nomin in the bond ? 
 portia . it is not so express 'd , but what of that ? 
 'twere good you do so much for chariti . 
 shylock . i can not find it ; 't is not in the bond . 
 portia . you , merchant , have you anyth to say ? 
 antonio . but littl : i am arm 'd and well prepar 'd . 
 give me your hand , bassanio ; fare you well . 
 griev not that i am fall'n to thi for you , 
 for herein fortun show herself more kind 
 than is her custom . it is still her use 
 to let the wretch man outliv hi wealth , 
 to view with hollow eye and wrinkl brow 
 an age of poverti ; from which ling'r penanc 
 of such miseri doth she cut me off . 
 commend me to your honour wife ; 
 tell her the process of antonio 's end ; 
 say how i lov 'd you ; speak me fair in death ; 
 and , when the tale is told , bid her be judg 
 whether bassanio had not onc a love . 
 repent but you that you shall lose your friend , 
 and he repent not that he pay your debt ; 
 for if the jew do cut but deep enough , 
 i 'll pay it instantli with all my heart . 
 bassanio . antonio , i am marri to a wife 
 which is as dear to me as life itself ; 
 but life itself , my wife , and all the world , 
 are not with me esteem 'd abov thi life ; 
 i would lose all , ay , sacrific them all 
 here to thi devil , to deliv you . 
 portia . your wife would give you littl thank for that , 
 if she were by to hear you make the offer . 
 gratiano . i have a wife who i protest i love ; 
 i would she were in heaven , so she could 
 entreat some power to chang thi currish jew . 
 nerissa . 't is well you offer it behind her back ; 
 the wish would make els an unquiet hous . 
 shylock . [ asid ] these be the christian husband ! i have a 
 daughter- 
 would ani of the stock of barraba 
 had been her husband , rather than a christian ! - 
 we trifl time ; i pray thee pursu sentenc . 
 portia . a pound of that same merchant 's flesh is thine . 
 the court award it and the law doth give it . 
 shylock . most right judg ! 
 portia . and you must cut thi flesh from off hi breast . 
 the law allow it and the court award it . 
 shylock . most learn judg ! a sentenc ! come , prepar . 
 portia . tarri a littl ; there is someth els . 
 thi bond doth give thee here no jot of blood : 
 the word expressli are ' a pound of flesh . ' 
 take then thi bond , take thou thi pound of flesh ; 
 but , in the cut it , if thou dost shed 
 one drop of christian blood , thi land and good 
 are , by the law of venic , confisc 
 unto the state of venic . 
 gratiano . o upright judg ! mark , jew . o learn judg ! 
 shylock . is that the law ? 
 portia . thyself shalt see the act ; 
 for , as thou urgest justic , be assur 'd 
 thou shalt have justic , more than thou desir'st . 
 gratiano . o learn judg ! mark , jew . a learn judg ! 
 shylock . i take thi offer then : pay the bond thrice , 
 and let the christian go . 
 bassanio . here is the money . 
 portia . soft ! 
 the jew shall have all justic . soft ! no hast . 
 he shall have noth but the penalti . 
 gratiano . o jew ! an upright judg , a learn judg ! 
 portia . therefor , prepar thee to cut off the flesh . 
 shed thou no blood , nor cut thou less nor more 
 but just a pound of flesh ; if thou tak'st more 
 or less than a just pound- be it but so much 
 as make it light or heavi in the substanc , 
 or the divis of the twentieth part 
 of one poor scrupl ; nay , if the scale do turn 
 but in the estim of a hair- 
 thou diest , and all thi good are confisc . 
 gratiano . a second daniel , a daniel , jew ! 
 now , infidel , i have you on the hip . 
 portia . whi doth the jew paus ? take thi forfeitur . 
 shylock . give me my princip , and let me go . 
 bassanio . i have it readi for thee ; here it is . 
 portia . he hath refu 'd it in the open court ; 
 he shall have mere justic , and hi bond . 
 gratiano . a daniel still say i , a second daniel ! 
 i thank thee , jew , for teach me that word . 
 shylock . shall i not have bare my princip ? 
 portia . thou shalt have noth but the forfeitur 
 to be so taken at thi peril , jew . 
 shylock . whi , then the devil give him good of it ! 
 i 'll stay no longer question . 
 portia . tarri , jew . 
 the law hath yet anoth hold on you . 
 it is enact in the law of venic , 
 if it be prove against an alien 
 that by direct or indirect attempt 
 he seek the life of ani citizen , 
 the parti 'gainst the which he doth contriv 
 shall seiz one half hi good ; the other half 
 come to the privi coffer of the state ; 
 and the offend 's life lie in the merci 
 of the duke onli , 'gainst all other voic . 
 in which predica , i say , thou stand'st ; 
 for it appear by manifest proceed 
 that indirectli , and directli too , 
 thou hast contriv against the veri life 
 of the defend ; and thou hast incurr 'd 
 the danger formerli by me rehear 'd . 
 down , therefor , and beg merci of the duke . 
 gratiano . beg that thou mayst have leav to hang thyself ; 
 and yet , thi wealth be forfeit to the state , 
 thou hast not left the valu of a cord ; 
 therefor thou must be hang 'd at the state 's charg . 
 duke of venic . that thou shalt see the differ of our spirit , 
 i pardon thee thi life befor thou ask it . 
 for half thi wealth , it is antonio 's ; 
 the other half come to the gener state , 
 which humbl may drive unto a fine . 
 portia . ay , for the state ; not for antonio . 
 shylock . nay , take my life and all , pardon not that . 
 you take my hous when you do take the prop 
 that doth sustain my hous ; you take my life 
 when you do take the mean wherebi i live . 
 portia . what merci can you render him , antonio ? 
 gratiano . a halter grati ; noth els , for god 's sake ! 
 antonio . so pleas my lord the duke and all the court 
 to quit the fine for one half of hi good ; 
 i am content , so he will let me have 
 the other half in use , to render it 
 upon hi death unto the gentleman 
 that late stole hi daughter- 
 two thing provid more ; that , for thi favour , 
 he present becom a christian ; 
 the other , that he do record a gift , 
 here in the court , of all he die possess 'd 
 unto hi son lorenzo and hi daughter . 
 duke of venic . he shall do thi , or els i do recant 
 the pardon that i late pronounc here . 
 portia . art thou content , jew ? what dost thou say ? 
 shylock . i am content . 
 portia . clerk , draw a deed of gift . 
 shylock . i pray you , give me leav to go from henc ; 
 i am not well ; send the deed after me 
 and i will sign it . 
 duke of venic . get thee gone , but do it . 
 gratiano . in christ'n shalt thou have two god-fath ; 
 had i been judg , thou shouldst have had ten more , 
 to bring thee to the gallow , not to the font . 
 exit shylock 
 duke of venic . sir , i entreat you home with me to dinner . 
 portia . i humbl do desir your grace of pardon ; 
 i must away thi night toward padua , 
 and it is meet i present set forth . 
 duke of venic . i am sorri that your leisur serv you not . 
 antonio , gratifi thi gentleman , 
 for in my mind you are much bound to him . 
 exeunt duke , magnifico , and train 
 bassanio . most worthi gentleman , i and my friend 
 have by your wisdom been thi day acquit 
 of grievou penalti ; in lieu whereof 
 three thousand ducat , due unto the jew , 
 we freeli cope your courteou pain withal . 
 antonio . and stand indebt , over and abov , 
 in love and servic to you evermor . 
 portia . he is well paid that is well satisfi , 
 and i , deliv you , am satisfi , 
 and therein do account myself well paid . 
 my mind wa never yet more mercenari . 
 i pray you , know me when we meet again ; 
 i wish you well , and so i take my leav . 
 bassanio . dear sir , of forc i must attempt you further ; 
 take some remembr of us , as a tribut , 
 not as fee . grant me two thing , i pray you , 
 not to deni me , and to pardon me . 
 portia . you press me far , and therefor i will yield . 
 [ to antonio ] give me your glove , i 'll wear them for your sake . 
 [ to bassanio ] and , for your love , i 'll take thi ring from you . 
 do not draw back your hand ; i 'll take no more , 
 and you in love shall not deni me thi . 
 bassanio . thi ring , good sir- ala , it is a trifl ; 
 i will not shame myself to give you thi . 
 portia . i will have noth els but onli thi ; 
 and now , methink , i have a mind to it . 
 bassanio .. there 's more depend on thi than on the valu . 
 the dearest ring in venic will i give you , 
 and find it out by proclam ; 
 onli for thi , i pray you , pardon me . 
 portia . i see , sir , you are liber in offer ; 
 you taught me first to beg , and now , methink , 
 you teach me how a beggar should be answer 'd . 
 bassanio . good sir , thi ring wa given me by my wife ; 
 and , when she put it on , she made me vow 
 that i should neither sell , nor give , nor lose it . 
 portia . that 'scuse serv mani men to save their gift . 
 and if your wife be not a mad woman , 
 and know how well i have deserv 'd thi ring , 
 she would not hold out enemi for ever 
 for give it to me . well , peac be with you ! 
 exeunt portia and nerissa 
 antonio . my lord bassanio , let him have the ring . 
 let hi deserv , and my love withal , 
 be valu 'gainst your wife 's command . 
 bassanio . go , gratiano , run and overtak him ; 
 give him the ring , and bring him , if thou canst , 
 unto antonio 's hous . away , make hast . exit gratiano 
 come , you and i will thither present ; 
 and in the morn earli will we both 
 fli toward belmont . come , antonio . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 venic . a street 
 
 enter portia and nerissa 
 
 portia . inquir the jew 's hous out , give him thi deed , 
 and let him sign it ; we 'll away tonight , 
 and be a day befor our husband home . 
 thi deed will be well welcom to lorenzo . 
 
 enter gratiano 
 
 gratiano . fair sir , you are well o'erta'en . 
 my lord bassanio , upon more advic , 
 hath sent you here thi ring , and doth entreat 
 your compani at dinner . 
 portia . that can not be . 
 hi ring i do accept most thank , 
 and so , i pray you , tell him . furthermor , 
 i pray you show my youth old shylock 's hous . 
 gratiano . that will i do . 
 nerissa . sir , i would speak with you . 
 [ asid to portia ] i 'll see if i can get my husband 's ring , 
 which i did make him swear to keep for ever . 
 portia . [ to nerissa ] thou mayst , i warrant . we shall have old 
 swear 
 that they did give the ring away to men ; 
 but we 'll outfac them , and outswear them too . 
 [ aloud ] away , make hast , thou know'st where i will tarri . 
 nerissa . come , good sir , will you show me to thi hous ? 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 belmont . the garden befor portia 's hous 
 
 enter lorenzo and jessica 
 
 lorenzo . the moon shine bright . in such a night as thi , 
 when the sweet wind did gentli kiss the tree , 
 and they did make no noise- in such a night , 
 troilu methink mount the troyan wall , 
 and sigh 'd hi soul toward the grecian tent , 
 where cressid lay that night . 
 jessica . in such a night 
 did thisbi fear o'ertrip the dew , 
 and saw the lion 's shadow ere himself , 
 and ran dismay away . 
 lorenzo . in such a night 
 stood dido with a willow in her hand 
 upon the wild sea-bank , and waft her love 
 to come again to carthag . 
 jessica . in such a night 
 medea gather the enchant herb 
 that did renew old aeson . 
 lorenzo . in such a night 
 did jessica steal from the wealthi jew , 
 and with an unthrift love did run from venic 
 as far as belmont . 
 jessica . in such a night 
 did young lorenzo swear he lov 'd her well , 
 steal her soul with mani vow of faith , 
 and ne'er a true one . 
 lorenzo . in such a night 
 did pretti jessica , like a littl shrew , 
 slander her love , and he forgav it her . 
 jessica . i would out-night you , did no bodi come ; 
 but , hark , i hear the foot of a man . 
 
 enter stephano 
 
 lorenzo . who come so fast in silenc of the night ? 
 stephano . a friend . 
 lorenzo . a friend ! what friend ? your name , i pray you , friend ? 
 stephano . stephano is my name , and i bring word 
 my mistress will befor the break of day 
 be here at belmont ; she doth stray about 
 by holi cross , where she kneel and pray 
 for happi wedlock hour . 
 lorenzo . who come with her ? 
 stephano . none but a holi hermit and her maid . 
 i pray you , is my master yet return 'd ? 
 lorenzo . he is not , nor we have not heard from him . 
 but go we in , i pray thee , jessica , 
 and ceremoni let us prepar 
 some welcom for the mistress of the hous . 
 
 enter launcelot 
 
 launcelot . sola , sola ! wo ha , ho ! sola , sola ! 
 lorenzo . who call ? 
 launcelot . sola ! did you see master lorenzo ? master lorenzo ! sola , 
 sola ! 
 lorenzo . leav holloa , man . here ! 
 launcelot . sola ! where , where ? 
 lorenzo . here ! 
 launcelot . tell him there 's a post come from my master with hi 
 horn full of good news ; my master will be here ere morn . 
 exit 
 lorenzo . sweet soul , let 's in , and there expect their come . 
 and yet no matter- whi should we go in ? 
 my friend stephano , signifi , i pray you , 
 within the hous , your mistress is at hand ; 
 and bring your music forth into the air . exit stephano 
 how sweet the moonlight sleep upon thi bank ! 
 here will we sit and let the sound of music 
 creep in our ear ; soft still and the night 
 becom the touch of sweet harmoni . 
 sit , jessica . look how the floor of heaven 
 is thick inlaid with patin of bright gold ; 
 there 's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st 
 but in hi motion like an angel sing , 
 still quir to the young-ey 'd cherubin ; 
 such harmoni is in immort soul , 
 but whilst thi muddi vestur of decay 
 doth grossli close it in , we can not hear it . 
 
 enter musician 
 
 come , ho , and wake diana with a hymn ; 
 with sweetest touch pierc your mistress ' ear . 
 and draw her home with music . [ music ] 
 jessica . i am never merri when i hear sweet music . 
 lorenzo . the reason is your spirit are attent ; 
 for do but note a wild and wanton herd , 
 or race of youth and unhandl colt , 
 fetch mad bound , bellow and neigh loud , 
 which is the hot condit of their blood- 
 if they but hear perchanc a trumpet sound , 
 or ani air of music touch their ear , 
 you shall perceiv them make a mutual stand , 
 their savag eye turn 'd to a modest gaze 
 by the sweet power of music . therefor the poet 
 did feign that orpheu drew tree , stone , and flood ; 
 sinc nought so stockish , hard , and full of rage , 
 but music for the time doth chang hi natur . 
 the man that hath no music in himself , 
 nor is not mov 'd with concord of sweet sound , 
 is fit for treason , stratagem , and spoil ; 
 the motion of hi spirit are dull : as night , 
 and hi affect dark as erebu . 
 let no such man be trust . mark the music . 
 
 enter portia and nerissa 
 
 portia . that light we see is burn in my hall . 
 how far that littl candl throw hi beam ! 
 so shine a good deed in a naughti world . 
 nerissa . when the moon shone , we did not see the candl . 
 portia . so doth the greater glori dim the less : 
 a substitut shine brightli as a king 
 until a king be by , and then hi state 
 empti itself , as doth an inland brook 
 into the main of water . music ! hark ! 
 nerissa . it is your music , madam , of the hous . 
 portia . noth is good , i see , without respect ; 
 methink it sound much sweeter than by day . 
 nerissa . silenc bestow that virtu on it , madam . 
 portia . the crow doth sing as sweetli as the lark 
 when neither is attend ; and i think 
 ne nightingal , if she should sing by day , 
 when everi goos is cackl , would be thought 
 no better a musician than the wren . 
 how mani thing by season season 'd are 
 to their right prais and true perfect ! 
 peac , ho ! the moon sleep with endymion , 
 and would not be awak 'd . [ music ceas ] 
 lorenzo . that is the voic , 
 or i am much deceiv 'd , of portia . 
 portia . he know me as the blind man know the cuckoo , 
 by the bad voic . 
 lorenzo . dear ladi , welcom home . 
 portia . we have been pray for our husband ' welfar , 
 which speed , we hope , the better for our word . 
 are they return 'd ? 
 lorenzo . madam , they are not yet ; 
 but there is come a messeng befor , 
 to signifi their come . 
 portia .. go in , nerissa ; 
 give order to my servant that they take 
 no note at all of our be absent henc ; 
 nor you , lorenzo ; jessica , nor you . [ a tucket sound ] 
 lorenzo . your husband is at hand ; i hear hi trumpet . 
 we are no tell-tal , madam , fear you not . 
 portia . thi night methink is but the daylight sick ; 
 it look a littl paler ; 't is a day 
 such as the day is when the sun is hid . 
 
 enter bassanio , antonio , gratiano , and their follow 
 
 bassanio . we should hold day with the antipod , 
 if you would walk in absenc of the sun . 
 portia . let me give light , but let me not be light , 
 for a light wife doth make a heavi husband , 
 and never be bassanio so for me ; 
 but god sort all ! you are welcom home , my lord . 
 bassanio . i thank you , madam ; give welcom to my friend . 
 thi is the man , thi is antonio , 
 to whom i am so infinit bound . 
 portia . you should in all sens be much bound to him , 
 for , as i hear , he wa much bound for you . 
 antonio . no more than i am well acquit of . 
 portia . sir , you are veri welcom to our hous . 
 it must appear in other way than word , 
 therefor i scant thi breath courtesi . 
 gratiano . [ to nerissa ] by yonder moon i swear you do me wrong ; 
 in faith , i gave it to the judg 's clerk . 
 would he were gelt that had it , for my part , 
 sinc you do take it , love , so much at heart . 
 portia . a quarrel , ho , alreadi ! what 's the matter ? 
 gratiano . about a hoop of gold , a paltri ring 
 that she did give me , whose posi wa 
 for all the world like cutler 's poetri 
 upon a knife , 'love me , and leav me not . ' 
 nerissa . what talk you of the posi or the valu ? 
 you swore to me , when i did give it you , 
 that you would wear it till your hour of death , 
 and that it should lie with you in your grave ; 
 though not for me , yet for your vehement oath , 
 you should have been respect and have kept it . 
 gave it a judg 's clerk ! no , god 's my judg , 
 the clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it . 
 gratiano . he will , an if he live to be a man . 
 nerissa . ay , if a woman live to be a man . 
 gratiano . now by thi hand i gave it to a youth , 
 a kind of boy , a littl scrub boy 
 no higher than thyself , the judg 's clerk ; 
 a prate boy that begg 'd it as a fee ; 
 i could not for my heart deni it him . 
 portia . you were to blame , i must be plain with you , 
 to part so slightli with your wife 's first gift , 
 a thing stuck on with oath upon your finger 
 and so rivet with faith unto your flesh . 
 i gave my love a ring , and made him swear 
 never to part with it , and here he stand ; 
 i dare be sworn for him he would not leav it 
 nor pluck it from hi finger for the wealth 
 that the world master . now , in faith , gratiano , 
 you give your wife too unkind a caus of grief ; 
 an 'twere to me , i should be mad at it . 
 bassanio . [ asid ] whi , i were best to cut my left hand off , 
 and swear i lost the ring defend it . 
 gratiano . my lord bassanio gave hi ring away 
 unto the judg that begg 'd it , and inde 
 deserv 'd it too ; and then the boy , hi clerk , 
 that took some pain in write , he begg 'd mine ; 
 and neither man nor master would take aught 
 but the two ring . 
 portia . what ring gave you , my lord ? 
 not that , i hope , which you receiv 'd of me . 
 bassanio . if i could add a lie unto a fault , 
 i would deni it ; but you see my finger 
 hath not the ring upon it ; it is gone . 
 portia . even so void is your fals heart of truth ; 
 by heaven , i will ne'er come in your bed 
 until i see the ring . 
 nerissa . nor i in your 
 till i again see mine . 
 bassanio . sweet portia , 
 if you did know to whom i gave the ring , 
 if you did know for whom i gave the ring , 
 and would conceiv for what i gave the ring , 
 and how unwillingli i left the ring , 
 when nought would be accept but the ring , 
 you would abat the strength of your displeasur . 
 portia . if you had known the virtu of the ring , 
 or half her worthi that gave the ring , 
 or your own honour to contain the ring , 
 you would not then have part with the ring . 
 what man is there so much unreason , 
 if you had plea 'd to have defend it 
 with ani term of zeal , want the modesti 
 to urg the thing held as a ceremoni ? 
 nerissa teach me what to believ : 
 i 'll die for't but some woman had the ring . 
 bassanio . no , by my honour , madam , by my soul , 
 no woman had it , but a civil doctor , 
 which did refus three thousand ducat of me , 
 and begg 'd the ring ; the which i did deni him , 
 and suffer 'd him to go displea 'd away- 
 even he that had held up the veri life 
 of my dear friend . what should i say , sweet ladi ? 
 i wa enforc 'd to send it after him ; 
 i wa beset with shame and courtesi ; 
 my honour would not let ingratitud 
 so much besmear it . pardon me , good ladi ; 
 for by these bless candl of the night , 
 had you been there , i think you would have begg 'd 
 the ring of me to give the worthi doctor . 
 portia . let not that doctor e'er come near my hous ; 
 sinc he hath got the jewel that i love , 
 and that which you did swear to keep for me , 
 i will becom as liber as you ; 
 i 'll not deni him anyth i have , 
 no , not my bodi , nor my husband 's bed . 
 know him i shall , i am well sure of it . 
 lie not a night from home ; watch me like argu ; 
 if you do not , if i be left alon , 
 now , by mine honour which is yet mine own , 
 i 'll have that doctor for mine bedfellow . 
 nerissa . and i hi clerk ; therefor be well advi 'd 
 how you do leav me to mine own protect . 
 gratiano . well , do you so , let not me take him then ; 
 for , if i do , i 'll mar the young clerk 's pen . 
 antonio . i am th ' unhappi subject of these quarrel . 
 portia . sir , griev not you ; you are welcom not withstand . 
 bassanio . portia , forgiv me thi enforc wrong ; 
 and in the hear of these mani friend 
 i swear to thee , even by thine own fair eye , 
 wherein i see myself- 
 portia . mark you but that ! 
 in both my eye he doubli see himself , 
 in each eye one ; swear by your doubl self , 
 and there 's an oath of credit . 
 bassanio . nay , but hear me . 
 pardon thi fault , and by my soul i swear 
 i never more will break an oath with thee . 
 antonio . i onc did lend my bodi for hi wealth , 
 which , but for him that had your husband 's ring , 
 had quit miscarri ; i dare be bound again , 
 my soul upon the forfeit , that your lord 
 will never more break faith advisedli . 
 portia . then you shall be hi sureti . give him thi , 
 and bid him keep it better than the other . 
 antonio . here , lord bassanio , swear to keep thi ring . 
 bassanio . by heaven , it is the same i gave the doctor ! 
 portia . i had it of him . pardon me , bassanio , 
 for , by thi ring , the doctor lay with me . 
 nerissa . and pardon me , my gentl gratiano , 
 for that same scrub boy , the doctor 's clerk , 
 in lieu of thi , last night did lie with me . 
 gratiano . whi , thi is like the mend of highway 
 in summer , where the way are fair enough . 
 what , are we cuckold ere we have deserv 'd it ? 
 portia . speak not so grossli . you are all amaz 'd . 
 here is a letter ; read it at your leisur ; 
 it come from padua , from bellario ; 
 there you shall find that portia wa the doctor , 
 nerissa there her clerk . lorenzo here 
 shall wit i set forth as soon as you , 
 and even but now return 'd ; i have not yet 
 enter 'd my hous . antonio , you are welcom ; 
 and i have better news in store for you 
 than you expect . unseal thi letter soon ; 
 there you shall find three of your argosi 
 are richli come to harbour suddenli . 
 you shall not know by what strang accid 
 i chanc on thi letter . 
 antonio . i am dumb . 
 bassanio . were you the doctor , and i knew you not ? 
 gratiano . were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold ? 
 nerissa . ay , but the clerk that never mean to do it , 
 unless he live until he be a man . 
 bassanio . sweet doctor , you shall be my bedfellow ; 
 when i am absent , then lie with my wife . 
 antonio . sweet ladi , you have given me life and live ; 
 for here i read for certain that my ship 
 are safe come to road . 
 portia . how now , lorenzo ! 
 my clerk hath some good comfort too for you . 
 nerissa . ay , and i 'll give them him without a fee . 
 there do i give to you and jessica , 
 from the rich jew , a special deed of gift , 
 after hi death , of all he die possess 'd of . 
 lorenzo . fair ladi , you drop manna in the way 
 of starv peopl . 
 portia . it is almost morn , 
 and yet i am sure you are not satisfi 
 of these event at full . let us go in , 
 and charg us there upon inter'gatori , 
 and we will answer all thing faith . 
 gratiano . let it be so . the first inter'gatori 
 that my nerissa shall be sworn on is , 
 whether till the next night she had rather stay , 
 or go to bed now , be two hour to day . 
 but were the day come , i should wish it dark , 
 till i were couch with the doctor 's clerk . 
 well , while i live , i 'll fear no other thing 
 so sore as keep safe nerissa 's ring . exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the merri wive of windsor 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 sir john falstaff 
 fenton , a young gentleman 
 shallow , a countri justic 
 slender , cousin to shallow 
 
 gentlemen of windsor 
 ford 
 page 
 william page , a boy , son to page 
 sir hugh evan , a welsh parson 
 doctor caiu , a french physician 
 host of the garter inn 
 
 follow of falstaff 
 bardolph 
 pistol 
 nym 
 robin , page to falstaff 
 simpl , servant to slender 
 rugbi , servant to doctor caiu 
 
 mistress ford 
 mistress page 
 mistress ann page , her daughter 
 mistress quickli , servant to doctor caiu 
 servant to page , ford , etc . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 windsor , and the neighbourhood 
 
 
 the merri wive of windsor 
 
 
 
 act i. scene < num > . 
 
 windsor . befor page 's hous 
 
 enter justic shallow , slender , and sir hugh evan 
 
 shallow . sir hugh , persuad me not ; i will make a star 
 chamber matter of it ; if he were twenti sir john falstaff , 
 he shall not abus robert shallow , esquir . 
 slender . in the counti of gloucest , justic of peac , and 
 coram . 
 shallow . ay , cousin slender , and custalorum . 
 slender . ay , and ratolorum too ; and a gentleman born , 
 master parson , who write himself 'armigero ' in ani bill , 
 warrant , quittanc , or obligation-'armigero . ' 
 shallow . ay , that i do ; and have done ani time these three 
 hundr year . 
 slender . all hi successor , gone befor him , hath done't ; 
 and all hi ancestor , that come after him , may : they may 
 give the dozen white luce in their coat . 
 shallow . it is an old coat . 
 evan . the dozen white lous do becom an old coat well ; 
 it agre well , passant ; it is a familiar beast to man , and 
 signifi love . 
 shallow . the luce is the fresh fish ; the salt fish is an old 
 coat . 
 slender . i may quarter , coz . 
 shallow . you may , by marri . 
 evan . it is mar inde , if he quarter it . 
 shallow . not a whit . 
 evan . ye , py ' r ladi ! if he ha a quarter of your coat , there 
 is but three skirt for yourself , in my simpl conjectur ; 
 but that is all one . if sir john falstaff have commit 
 disparag unto you , i am of the church , and will be 
 glad to do my benevol , to make aton and 
 compremis between you . 
 shallow . the council shall hear it ; it is a riot . 
 evan . it is not meet the council hear a riot ; there is no 
 fear of got in a riot ; the council , look you , shall desir 
 to hear the fear of got , and not to hear a riot ; take your 
 vizament in that . 
 shallow . ha ! o ' my life , if i were young again , the sword 
 should end it . 
 evan . it is petter that friend is the sword and end it ; 
 and there is also anoth devic in my prain , which 
 peradventur pring goot discret with it . there is ann 
 page , which is daughter to master georg page , which is 
 pretti virgin . 
 slender . mistress ann page ? she ha brown hair , and 
 speak small like a woman . 
 evan . it is that feri person for all the orld , as just as you 
 will desir ; and seven hundr pound of money , and 
 gold , and silver , is her grandsir upon hi death's-bed-got 
 deliv to a joy resurrect ! -give , when she is abl to 
 overtak seventeen year old . it were a goot motion if we 
 leav our pribbl and prabbl , and desir a marriag 
 between master abraham and mistress ann page . 
 shallow . did her grandsir leav her seven hundr pound ? 
 evan . ay , and her father is make her a petter penni . 
 shallow . i know the young gentlewoman ; she ha good 
 gift . 
 evan . seven hundr pound , and possibl , is goot gift . 
 shallow . well , let us see honest master page . is falstaff 
 there ? 
 evan . shall i tell you a lie ? i do despis a liar as i do 
 despis one that is fals ; or as i despis one that is not 
 true . the knight sir john is there ; and , i beseech you , be 
 rule by your well-wil . i will peat the door for master 
 page . 
 [ knock ] what , hoa ! got pless your hous here ! 
 page . [ within ] who 's there ? 
 
 enter page 
 
 evan . here is got 's pless , and your friend , and justic 
 shallow ; and here young master slender , that peradventur 
 shall tell you anoth tale , if matter grow to your 
 like . 
 page . i am glad to see your worship well . i thank you for 
 my venison , master shallow . 
 shallow . master page , i am glad to see you ; much good do 
 it your good heart ! i wish 'd your venison better ; it wa ill 
 kill 'd . how doth good mistress page ? -and i thank you 
 alway with my heart , la ! with my heart . 
 page . sir , i thank you . 
 shallow . sir , i thank you ; by yea and no , i do . 
 page . i am glad to see you , good master slender . 
 slender . how doe your fallow greyhound , sir ? i heard say 
 he wa outrun on cotsal . 
 page . it could not be judg 'd , sir . 
 slender . you 'll not confess , you 'll not confess . 
 shallow . that he will not . 't is your fault ; 't is your fault ; 
 't is a good dog . 
 page . a cur , sir . 
 shallow . sir , he 's a good dog , and a fair dog . can there be 
 more said ? he is good , and fair . is sir john falstaff here ? 
 page . sir , he is within ; and i would i could do a good offic 
 between you . 
 evan . it is spoke as a christian ought to speak . 
 shallow . he hath wrong 'd me , master page . 
 page . sir , he doth in some sort confess it . 
 shallow . if it be confess , it is not redress ; is not that 
 so , master page ? he hath wrong 'd me ; inde he hath ; at a 
 word , he hath , believ me ; robert shallow , esquir , saith 
 he is wrong . 
 page . here come sir john . 
 
 enter sir john falstaff , bardolph , nym , and pistol 
 
 falstaff . now , master shallow , you 'll complain of me to 
 the king ? 
 shallow . knight , you have beaten my men , kill 'd my deer , 
 and broke open my lodg . 
 falstaff . but not kiss 'd your keeper 's daughter . 
 shallow . tut , a pin ! thi shall be answer 'd . 
 falstaff . i will answer it straight : i have done all thi . 
 that is now answer 'd . 
 shallow . the council shall know thi . 
 falstaff . 'twere better for you if it were known in counsel : 
 you 'll be laugh 'd at . 
 evan . pauca verba , sir john ; goot wort . 
 falstaff . good wort ! good cabbag ! slender , i broke your 
 head ; what matter have you against me ? 
 slender . marri , sir , i have matter in my head against you ; 
 and against your cony-catch rascal , bardolph , nym , 
 and pistol . they carri me to the tavern , and made me 
 drunk , and afterward pick 'd my pocket . 
 bardolph . you banburi chees ! 
 slender . ay , it is no matter . 
 pistol . how now , mephostophilu ! 
 slender . ay , it is no matter . 
 nym . slice , i say ! pauca , pauca ; slice ! that 's my humour . 
 slender . where 's simpl , my man ? can you tell , cousin ? 
 evan . peac , i pray you . now let us understand . there is 
 three umpir in thi matter , as i understand : that is , 
 master page , fidelicet master page ; and there is myself , 
 fidelicet myself ; and the three parti is , lastli and 
 final , mine host of the garter . 
 page . we three to hear it and end it between them . 
 evan . feri goot . i will make a prief of it in my note-book ; 
 and we will afterward ork upon the caus with as great 
 discreetli as we can . 
 falstaff . pistol ! 
 pistol . he hear with ear . 
 evan . the tevil and hi tam ! what phrase is thi , 'he hear 
 with ear ' ? whi , it is affect . 
 falstaff . pistol , did you pick master slender 's purs ? 
 slender . ay , by these glove , did he-or i would i might 
 never come in mine own great chamber again els ! -of 
 seven groat in mill-sixp , and two edward 
 shovel-board that cost me two shill and two penc apiec 
 of yead miller , by these glove . 
 falstaff . is thi true , pistol ? 
 evan . no , it is fals , if it is a pick-purs . 
 pistol . ha , thou mountain-foreign ! sir john and master 
 mine , 
 i combat challeng of thi latten bilbo . 
 word of denial in thi labra here ! 
 word of denial ! froth and scum , thou liest . 
 slender . by these glove , then , 't wa he . 
 nym . be avi 'd , sir , and pass good humour ; i will say 
 'marri trap ' with you , if you run the nuthook 's humour on 
 me ; that is the veri note of it . 
 slender . by thi hat , then , he in the red face had it ; for 
 though i can not rememb what i did when you made me 
 drunk , yet i am not altogeth an ass . 
 falstaff . what say you , scarlet and john ? 
 bardolph . whi , sir , for my part , i say the gentleman had 
 drunk himself out of hi five sentenc . 
 evan . it is hi five sens ; fie , what the ignor is ! 
 bardolph . and be fap , sir , wa , as they say , cashier 'd ; 
 and so conclus pass 'd the career . 
 slender . ay , you spake in latin then too ; but 't is no matter ; 
 i 'll ne'er be drunk whilst i live again , but in honest , 
 civil , godli compani , for thi trick . if i be drunk , i 'll be 
 drunk with those that have the fear of god , and not with 
 drunken knave . 
 evan . so got udg me , that is a virtuou mind . 
 falstaff . you hear all these matter deni 'd , gentlemen ; you 
 hear it . 
 
 enter mistress ann page with wine ; mistress 
 ford and mistress page , follow 
 
 page . nay , daughter , carri the wine in ; we 'll drink within . 
 exit ann page 
 slender . o heaven ! thi is mistress ann page . 
 page . how now , mistress ford ! 
 falstaff . mistress ford , by my troth , you are veri well 
 met ; by your leav , good mistress . [ kiss her ] 
 page . wife , bid these gentlemen welcom . come , we have a 
 hot venison pasti to dinner ; come , gentlemen , i hope we 
 shall drink down all unkind . 
 exeunt all but shallow , slender , and evan 
 slender . i had rather than forti shill i had my book of 
 song and sonnet here . 
 
 enter simpl 
 
 how , simpl ! where have you been ? i must wait on 
 myself , must i ? you have not the book of riddl about you , 
 have you ? 
 simpl . book of riddl ! whi , did you not lend it to alic 
 shortcak upon allhallowma last , a fortnight afor 
 michaelma ? 
 shallow . come , coz ; come , coz ; we stay for you . a word 
 with you , coz ; marri , thi , coz : there is , as 'twere , a 
 tender , a kind of tender , made afar off by sir hugh here . do 
 you understand me ? 
 slender . ay , sir , you shall find me reason ; if it be so , i 
 shall do that that is reason . 
 shallow . nay , but understand me . 
 slender . so i do , sir . 
 evan . give ear to hi motion : master slender , i will 
 descript the matter to you , if you be capac of it . 
 slender . nay , i will do as my cousin shallow say ; i pray 
 you pardon me ; he 's a justic of peac in hi countri , 
 simpl though i stand here . 
 evan . but that is not the question . the question is 
 concern your marriag . 
 shallow . ay , there 's the point , sir . 
 evan . marri is it ; the veri point of it ; to mistress ann 
 page . 
 slender . whi , if it be so , i will marri her upon ani 
 reason demand . 
 evan . but can you affect the oman ? let us command to 
 know that of your mouth or of your lip ; for diver philosoph 
 hold that the lip is parcel of the mouth . therefor , 
 precis , can you carri your good will to the maid ? 
 shallow . cousin abraham slender , can you love her ? 
 slender . i hope , sir , i will do as it shall becom one that 
 would do reason . 
 evan . nay , got 's lord and hi ladi ! you must speak possit , 
 if you can carri her your desir toward her . 
 shallow . that you must . will you , upon good dowri , 
 marri her ? 
 slender . i will do a greater thing than that upon your request , 
 cousin , in ani reason . 
 shallow . nay , conceiv me , conceiv me , sweet coz ; what 
 i do is to pleasur you , coz . can you love the maid ? 
 slender . i will marri her , sir , at your request ; but if there 
 be no great love in the begin , yet heaven may decreas 
 it upon better acquaint , when we are marri and 
 have more occas to know one anoth . i hope upon 
 familiar will grow more contempt . but if you say 
 'marri her , ' i will marri her ; that i am freeli dissolv , 
 and dissolut . 
 evan . it is a feri discret answer , save the fall is in the 
 ord 'dissolut ' : the ort is , accord to our mean , 
 'resolut ' ; hi mean is good . 
 shallow . ay , i think my cousin meant well . 
 slender . ay , or els i would i might be hang 'd , la ! 
 
 re-ent ann page 
 
 shallow . here come fair mistress ann . would i were 
 young for your sake , mistress ann ! 
 ann . the dinner is on the tabl ; my father desir your 
 worship ' compani . 
 shallow . i will wait on him , fair mistress ann ! 
 evan . od 's pless will ! i will not be absenc at the grace . 
 exeunt shallow and evan 
 ann . will't pleas your worship to come in , sir ? 
 slender . no , i thank you , forsooth , heartili ; i am veri 
 well . 
 ann . the dinner attend you , sir . 
 slender . i am not a-hungri , i thank you , forsooth . go , 
 sirrah , for all you are my man , go wait upon my cousin 
 shallow . [ exit simpl ] a justic of peac sometim may 
 be behold to hi friend for a man . i keep but three men 
 and a boy yet , till my mother be dead . but what though ? 
 yet i live like a poor gentleman born . 
 ann . i may not go in without your worship ; they will not 
 sit till you come . 
 slender . i ' faith , i 'll eat noth ; i thank you as much as 
 though i did . 
 ann . i pray you , sir , walk in . 
 slender . i had rather walk here , i thank you . i brui 'd my 
 shin th ' other day with play at sword and dagger with 
 a master of fence-thre veney for a dish of stew 'd prune 
 -and , i with my ward defend my head , he hot my shin , 
 and , by my troth , i can not abid the smell of hot meat 
 sinc . whi do your dog bark so ? be there bear i ' th ' 
 town ? 
 ann . i think there are , sir ; i heard them talk 'd of . 
 slender . i love the sport well ; but i shall as soon quarrel at 
 it as ani man in england . you are afraid , if you see the 
 bear loos , are you not ? 
 ann . ay , inde , sir . 
 slender . that 's meat and drink to me now . i have seen 
 sackerson loos twenti time , and have taken him by the 
 chain ; but i warrant you , the women have so cri and 
 shriek 'd at it that it pass 'd ; but women , inde , can not 
 abid 'em ; they are veri ill-favour 'd rough thing . 
 
 re-ent page 
 
 page . come , gentl master slender , come ; we stay for you . 
 slender . i 'll eat noth , i thank you , sir . 
 page . by cock and pie , you shall not choos , sir ! come , 
 come . 
 slender . nay , pray you lead the way . 
 page . come on , sir . 
 slender . mistress ann , yourself shall go first . 
 ann . not i , sir ; pray you keep on . 
 slender . truli , i will not go first ; truli , la ! i will not do 
 you that wrong . 
 ann . i pray you , sir . 
 slender . i 'll rather be unmannerli than troublesom . you 
 do yourself wrong inde , la ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 befor page 's hous 
 
 enter sir hugh evan and simpl 
 
 evan . go your way , and ask of doctor caiu ' hous which 
 is the way ; and there dwell one mistress quickli , which 
 is in the manner of hi nurs , or hi dri nurs , or hi cook , 
 or hi laundri , hi washer , and hi wringer . 
 simpl . well , sir . 
 evan . nay , it is petter yet . give her thi letter ; for it is a 
 oman that altogeth 's acquaint with mistress ann 
 page ; and the letter is to desir and requir her to solicit 
 your master 's desir to mistress ann page . i pray you 
 be gone . i will make an end of my dinner ; there 's pippin 
 and chees to come . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the garter inn 
 
 enter falstaff , host , bardolph , nym , pistol , and robin 
 
 falstaff . mine host of the garter ! 
 host . what say my bulli rook ? speak scholarli and 
 wise . 
 falstaff . truli , mine host , i must turn away some of my 
 follow . 
 host . discard , bulli hercul ; cashier ; let them wag ; trot , 
 trot . 
 falstaff . i sit at ten pound a week . 
 host . thou'rt an emperor-caesar , keiser , and pheazar . i 
 will entertain bardolph ; he shall draw , he shall tap ; said i 
 well , bulli hector ? 
 falstaff . do so , good mine host . 
 host . i have spoke ; let him follow . [ to bardolph ] let me 
 see thee froth and lime . i am at a word ; follow . exit host 
 falstaff . bardolph , follow him . a tapster is a good trade ; 
 an old cloak make a new jerkin ; a wither 'd serving-man a 
 fresh tapster . go ; adieu . 
 bardolph . it is a life that i have desir 'd ; i will thrive . 
 pistol . o base hungarian wight ! wilt thou the spigot 
 wield ? exit bardolph 
 nym . he wa gotten in drink . is not the humour conceit ? 
 falstaff . i am glad i am so acquit of thi tinder-box : hi 
 theft were too open ; hi filch wa like an unskil 
 singer-h kept not time . 
 nym . the good humour is to steal at a minut 's rest . 
 pistol . 'convey ' the wise it call . 'steal ' foh ! a fico for the 
 phrase ! 
 falstaff . well , sir , i am almost out at heel . 
 pistol . whi , then , let kibe ensu . 
 falstaff . there is no remedi ; i must cony-catch ; i must 
 shift . 
 pistol . young raven must have food . 
 falstaff . which of you know ford of thi town ? 
 pistol . i ken the wight ; he is of substanc good . 
 falstaff . my honest lad , i will tell you what i am about . 
 pistol . two yard , and more . 
 falstaff . no quip now , pistol . inde , i am in the waist 
 two yard about ; but i am now about no wast ; i am about 
 thrift . briefli , i do mean to make love to ford 's wife ; i 
 spi entertain in her ; she discours , she carv , she 
 give the leer of invit ; i can constru the action of her 
 familiar style ; and the hardest voic of her behaviour , to be 
 english 'd rightli , is ' i am sir john falstaff 's . ' 
 pistol . he hath studi her well , and translat her will out 
 of honesti into english . 
 nym . the anchor is deep ; will that humour pass ? 
 falstaff . now , the report goe she ha all the rule of her 
 husband 's purs ; he hath a legion of angel . 
 pistol . as mani devil entertain ; and 'to her , boy , ' say i . 
 nym . the humour rise ; it is good ; humour me the angel . 
 falstaff . i have writ me here a letter to her ; and here 
 anoth to page 's wife , who even now gave me good eye 
 too , examin 'd my part with most judici oeillad ; 
 sometim the beam of her view gild my foot , sometim my 
 portli belli . 
 pistol . then did the sun on dunghil shine . 
 nym . i thank thee for that humour . 
 falstaff . o , she did so cours o'er my exterior with such 
 a greedi intent that the appetit of her eye did seem to 
 scorch me up like a burning-glass ! here 's anoth letter to 
 her . she bear the purs too ; she is a region in guiana , all 
 gold and bounti . i will be cheater to them both , and they 
 shall be exchequ to me ; they shall be my east and west 
 indi , and i will trade to them both . go , bear thou thi 
 letter to mistress page ; and thou thi to mistress ford . we 
 will thrive , lad , we will thrive . 
 pistol . shall i sir pandaru of troy becom , 
 and by my side wear steel ? then lucif take all ! 
 nym . i will run no base humour . here , take the 
 humour-lett ; i will keep the haviour of reput . 
 falstaff . [ to robin ] hold , sirrah ; bear you these letter 
 tightli ; 
 sail like my pinnac to these golden shore . 
 rogu , henc , avaunt ! vanish like hailston , go ; 
 trudg , plod away i ' th ' hoof ; seek shelter , pack ! 
 falstaff will learn the humour of the age ; 
 french thrift , you rogu ; myself , and skirt page . 
 exeunt falstaff and robin 
 pistol . let vultur gripe thi gut ! for gourd and fullam 
 hold , 
 and high and low beguil the rich and poor ; 
 tester i 'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack , 
 base phrygian turk ! 
 nym . i have oper in my head which be humour of 
 reveng . 
 pistol . wilt thou reveng ? 
 nym . by welkin and her star ! 
 pistol . with wit or steel ? 
 nym . with both the humour , i . 
 i will discuss the humour of thi love to page . 
 pistol . and i to ford shall eke unfold 
 how falstaff , varlet vile , 
 hi dove will prove , hi gold will hold , 
 and hi soft couch defil . 
 nym . my humour shall not cool ; i will incens page to deal 
 with poison ; i will possess him with yellow ; for the 
 revolt of mine is danger . that is my true humour . 
 pistol . thou art the mar of malcont ; i second thee ; 
 troop on . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 doctor caiu 's hous 
 
 enter mistress quickli , simpl , and rugbi 
 
 quickli . what , john rugbi ! i pray thee go to the casement 
 and see if you can see my master , master doctor 
 caiu , come . if he do , i ' faith , and find anybodi in the 
 hous , here will be an old abus of god 's patienc and 
 the king 's english . 
 rugbi . i 'll go watch . 
 quickli . go ; and we 'll have a posset for't soon at night , in 
 faith , at the latter end of a sea-coal fire . [ exit rugbi ] an 
 honest , will , kind fellow , as ever servant shall come in 
 hous withal ; and , i warrant you , no tell-tal nor no 
 breed-bat ; hi worst fault is that he is given to prayer ; he is 
 someth peevish that way ; but nobodi but ha hi fault ; 
 but let that pass . peter simpl you say your name is ? 
 simpl . ay , for fault of a better . 
 quickli . and master slender 's your master ? 
 simpl . ay , forsooth . 
 quickli . doe he not wear a great round beard , like a 
 glover 's paring-knif ? 
 simpl . no , forsooth ; he hath but a littl whey face , with a 
 littl yellow beard , a cain-colour 'd beard . 
 quickli . a softly-spright man , is he not ? 
 simpl . ay , forsooth ; but he is as tall a man of hi hand as 
 ani is between thi and hi head ; he hath fought with a 
 warren . 
 quickli . how say you ? o , i should rememb him . doe 
 he not hold up hi head , as it were , and strut in hi gait ? 
 simpl . ye , inde , doe he . 
 quickli . well , heaven send ann page no wors fortun ! 
 tell master parson evan i will do what i can for your 
 master . ann is a good girl , and i wish- 
 
 re-ent rugbi 
 
 rugbi . out , ala ! here come my master . 
 quickli . we shall all be shent . run in here , good young 
 man ; go into thi closet . [ shut simpl in the closet ] he 
 will not stay long . what , john rugbi ! john ! what , john , 
 i say ! go , john , go inquir for my master ; i doubt he be 
 not well that he come not home . [ sing ] 
 and down , down , adown-a , etc . 
 
 enter doctor caiu 
 
 caiu . vat is you sing ? i do not like de toy . pray you , go 
 and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert-a box , a green-a 
 box . do intend vat i speak ? a green-a box . 
 quickli . ay , forsooth , i 'll fetch it you . [ asid ] i am glad 
 he went not in himself ; if he had found the young man , 
 he would have been horn-mad . 
 caiu . fe , fe , fe fe ! ma foi , il fait fort chaud . je m'en vai a 
 la cour-la grand affair . 
 quickli . is it thi , sir ? 
 caiu . oui ; mett le au mon pocket : depech , quickli . vere 
 is dat knave , rugbi ? 
 quickli . what , john rugbi ? john ! 
 rugbi . here , sir . 
 caiu . you are john rugbi , and you are jack rugbi . 
 come , take-a your rapier , and come after my heel to the 
 court . 
 rugbi . 't is readi , sir , here in the porch . 
 caiu . by my trot , i tarri too long . od 's me ! qu'ai j'oubli ? 
 dere is some simpl in my closet dat i vill not for the 
 varld i shall leav behind . 
 quickli . ay me , he 'll find the young man there , and be 
 mad ! 
 caiu . o diabl , diabl ! vat is in my closet ? villaini ! larron ! 
 [ pull simpl out ] rugbi , my rapier ! 
 quickli . good master , be content . 
 caiu . wherefor shall i be content-a ? 
 quickli . the young man is an honest man . 
 caiu . what shall de honest man do in my closet ? dere is 
 no honest man dat shall come in my closet . 
 quickli . i beseech you , be not so phlegmat ; hear the 
 truth of it . he came of an errand to me from parson hugh . 
 caiu . vell ? 
 simpl . ay , forsooth , to desir her to- 
 quickli . peac , i pray you . 
 caiu . peace-a your tongu . speak-a your tale . 
 simpl . to desir thi honest gentlewoman , your maid , to 
 speak a good word to mistress ann page for my master , 
 in the way of marriag . 
 quickli . thi is all , inde , la ! but i 'll ne'er put my finger 
 in the fire , and need not . 
 caiu . sir hugh send-a you ? rugbi , baillez me some paper . 
 tarri you a little-a-whil . [ write ] 
 quickli . [ asid to simpl ] i am glad he is so quiet ; if he 
 had been throughli move , you should have heard him 
 so loud and so melancholi . but notwithstand , man , i 'll 
 do you your master what good i can ; and the veri yea and 
 the no is , the french doctor , my master-i may call him 
 my master , look you , for i keep hi hous ; and i wash , 
 wring , brew , bake , scour , dress meat and drink , make the 
 bed , and do all myself- 
 simpl . [ asid to quickli ] 't is a great charg to come 
 under one bodi 's hand . 
 quickli . [ asid to simpl ] are you avi 'd o ' that ? you 
 shall find it a great charg ; and to be up earli and down 
 late ; but notwithstanding-to tell you in your ear , i would 
 have no word of it-mi master himself is in love with 
 mistress ann page ; but notwithstand that , i know 
 ann 's mind-that 's neither here nor there . 
 caiu . you jack'nap ; give-a thi letter to sir hugh ; by gar , 
 it is a shalleng ; i will cut hi troat in de park ; and i will 
 teach a scurvi jack-a-nap priest to meddl or make . you 
 may be gone ; it is not good you tarri here . by gar , i will 
 cut all hi two stone ; by gar , he shall not have a stone 
 to throw at hi dog . exit simpl 
 quickli . ala , he speak but for hi friend . 
 caiu . it is no matter-a ver dat . do not you tell-a me dat i 
 shall have ann page for myself ? by gar , i vill kill de jack 
 priest ; and i have appoint mine host of de jarteer to 
 measur our weapon . by gar , i will myself have ann 
 page . 
 quickli . sir , the maid love you , and all shall be well . we 
 must give folk leav to prate . what the good-year ! 
 caiu . rugbi , come to the court with me . by gar , if i have 
 not ann page , i shall turn your head out of my door . 
 follow my heel , rugbi . exeunt caiu and rugbi 
 quickli . you shall have-an fool's-head of your own . no , 
 i know ann 's mind for that ; never a woman in windsor 
 know more of ann 's mind than i do ; nor can do more 
 than i do with her , i thank heaven . 
 fenton . [ within ] who 's within there ? ho ! 
 quickli . who 's there , i trow ? come near the hous , i pray 
 you . 
 
 enter fenton 
 
 fenton . how now , good woman , how dost thou ? 
 quickli . the better that it pleas your good worship to 
 ask . 
 fenton . what news ? how doe pretti mistress ann ? 
 quickli . in truth , sir , and she is pretti , and honest , and 
 gentl ; and one that is your friend , i can tell you that by 
 the way ; i prais heaven for it . 
 fenton . shall i do ani good , think'st thou ? shall i not lose 
 my suit ? 
 quickli . troth , sir , all is in hi hand abov ; but 
 notwithstand , master fenton , i 'll be sworn on a book 
 she love you . have not your worship a wart abov your eye ? 
 fenton . ye , marri , have i ; what of that ? 
 quickli . well , therebi hang a tale ; good faith , it is such 
 anoth nan ; but , i detest , an honest maid as ever broke 
 bread . we had an hour 's talk of that wart ; i shall never 
 laugh but in that maid 's compani ! but , inde , she is 
 given too much to allicholi and muse ; but for you-wel , 
 go to . 
 fenton . well , i shall see her to-day . hold , there 's money 
 for thee ; let me have thi voic in my behalf . if thou seest 
 her befor me , commend me . 
 quickli . will i ? i ' faith , that we will ; and i will tell your 
 worship more of the wart the next time we have confid ; 
 and of other wooer . 
 fenton . well , farewel ; i am in great hast now . 
 quickli . farewel to your worship . [ exit fenton ] truli , 
 an honest gentleman ; but ann love him not ; for i know 
 ann 's mind as well as anoth doe . out upon 't , what 
 have i forgot ? exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene < num > . 
 
 befor page 's hous 
 
 enter mistress page , with a letter 
 
 mrs. page . what ! have i scap 'd love-lett in the holiday-tim 
 of my beauti , and am i now a subject for them ? let 
 me see . [ read ] 
 'ask me no reason whi i love you ; for though love use 
 reason for hi precisian , he admit him not for hi counsellor . 
 you are not young , no more am i ; go to , then , there 's 
 sympathi . you are merri , so am i ; ha ! ha ! then there 's 
 more sympathi . you love sack , and so do i ; would you 
 desir better sympathi ? let it suffic thee , mistress page 
 at the least , if the love of soldier can suffice-that i love 
 thee . i will not say , piti me : 't is not a soldier-lik phrase ; 
 but i say , love me . by me , 
 thine own true knight , 
 by day or night , 
 or ani kind of light , 
 with all hi might , 
 for thee to fight , 
 john falstaff . ' 
 what a herod of jewri is thi ! o wick , wick world ! 
 one that is well-nigh worn to piec with age to show 
 himself a young gallant ! what an unweigh behaviour 
 hath thi flemish drunkard pick'd-with the devil 's name ! 
 -out of my convers , that he dare in thi manner 
 assay me ? whi , he hath not been thrice in my compani ! 
 what should i say to him ? i wa then frugal of my mirth . 
 heaven forgiv me ! whi , i 'll exhibit a bill in the parliament 
 for the put down of men . how shall i be 
 reveng 'd on him ? for reveng 'd i will be , as sure as hi gut 
 are made of pud . 
 
 enter mistress ford 
 
 mrs. ford . mistress page ! trust me , i wa go to your 
 hous . 
 mrs. page . and , trust me , i wa come to you . you look 
 veri ill. 
 mrs. ford . nay , i 'll ne'er believ that ; i have to show to 
 the contrari . 
 mrs. page . faith , but you do , in my mind . 
 mrs. ford . well , i do , then ; yet , i say , i could show you to 
 the contrari . o mistress page , give me some counsel . 
 mrs. page . what 's the matter , woman ? 
 mrs. ford . o woman , if it were not for one trifl respect , 
 i could come to such honour ! 
 mrs. page . hang the trifl , woman ; take the honour . what 
 is it ? dispens with trifl ; what is it ? 
 mrs. ford . if i would but go to hell for an etern moment 
 or so , i could be knight . 
 mrs. page . what ? thou liest . sir alic ford ! these knight 
 will hack ; and so thou shouldst not alter the articl of thi 
 gentri . 
 mrs. ford . we burn daylight . here , read , read ; perceiv 
 how i might be knight . i shall think the wors of fat 
 men as long as i have an eye to make differ of men 's 
 like . and yet he would not swear ; prai 'd women 's 
 modesti , and gave such orderli and well-behav reproof 
 to all uncomeli that i would have sworn hi disposit 
 would have gone to the truth of hi word ; but they do no 
 more adher and keep place togeth than the hundredth 
 psalm to the tune of 'greensleev . ' what tempest , i trow , 
 threw thi whale , with so mani tun of oil in hi belli , 
 ashor at windsor ? how shall i be reveng on him ? i 
 think the best way were to entertain him with hope , till 
 the wick fire of lust have melt him in hi own greas . 
 did you ever hear the like ? 
 mrs. page . letter for letter , but that the name of page and 
 ford differ . to thi great comfort in thi mysteri of ill 
 opinion , here 's the twin-broth of thi letter ; but let thine 
 inherit first , for , i protest , mine never shall . i warrant he 
 hath a thousand of these letter , writ with blank space for 
 differ names-sur , more ! -and these are of the second 
 edit . he will print them , out of doubt ; for he care not 
 what he put into the press when he would put us two . i 
 had rather be a giantess and lie under mount pelion . well , 
 i will find you twenti lascivi turtl ere one chast 
 man . 
 mrs. ford . whi , thi is the veri same ; the veri hand , the 
 veri word . what doth he think of us ? 
 mrs. page . nay , i know not ; it make me almost readi to 
 wrangl with mine own honesti . i 'll entertain myself like 
 one that i am not acquaint withal ; for , sure , unless he 
 know some strain in me that i know not myself , he would 
 never have board me in thi furi . 
 mrs. ford . 'board ' call you it ? i 'll be sure to keep him 
 abov deck . 
 mrs. page . so will i ; if he come under my hatch , i 'll never 
 to sea again . let 's be reveng 'd on him ; let 's appoint him a 
 meet , give him a show of comfort in hi suit , and lead 
 him on with a fine-bait delay , till he hath pawn 'd hi 
 hors to mine host of the garter . 
 mrs. ford . nay , i will consent to act ani villaini against 
 him that may not sulli the chari of our honesti . o 
 that my husband saw thi letter ! it would give etern food 
 to hi jealousi . 
 mrs. page . whi , look where he come ; and my good man 
 too ; he 's as far from jealousi as i am from give him 
 caus ; and that , i hope , is an unmeasur distanc . 
 mrs. ford . you are the happier woman . 
 mrs. page . let 's consult togeth against thi greasi knight . 
 come hither . [ they retir ] 
 
 enter ford with pistol , and page with nym 
 
 ford . well , i hope it be not so . 
 pistol . hope is a curtal dog in some affair . 
 sir john affect thi wife . 
 ford . whi , sir , my wife is not young . 
 pistol . he woo both high and low , both rich and poor , 
 both young and old , one with anoth , ford ; 
 he love the gallimaufri . ford , perpend . 
 ford . love my wife ! 
 pistol . with liver burn hot . prevent , or go thou , 
 like sir actaeon he , with ringwood at thi heel . 
 o , odiou is the name ! 
 ford . what name , sir ? 
 pistol . the horn , i say . farewel . 
 take heed , have open eye , for thiev do foot by night ; 
 take heed , ere summer come , or cuckoo bird do sing . 
 away , sir corpor nym . 
 believ it , page ; he speak sens . exit pistol 
 ford . [ asid ] i will be patient ; i will find out thi . 
 nym . [ to page ] and thi is true ; i like not the humour of 
 lie . he hath wrong me in some humour ; i should 
 have born the humour 'd letter to her ; but i have a sword , 
 and it shall bite upon my necess . he love your wife ; 
 there 's the short and the long . 
 my name is corpor nym ; i speak , and i avouch ; 
 't is true . my name is nym , and falstaff love your wife . 
 adieu ! i love not the humour of bread and chees ; and 
 there 's the humour of it . adieu . exit nym 
 page . 'the humour of it , ' quoth ' a ! here 's a fellow fright 
 english out of hi wit . 
 ford . i will seek out falstaff . 
 page . i never heard such a drawl , affect rogu . 
 ford . if i do find it-wel . 
 page . i will not believ such a cataian though the priest o ' 
 th ' town commend him for a true man . 
 ford . 't wa a good sensibl fellow . well . 
 
 mistress page and mistress ford come forward 
 
 page . how now , meg ! 
 mrs. page . whither go you , georg ? hark you . 
 mrs. ford . how now , sweet frank , whi art thou melancholi ? 
 ford . i melancholi ! i am not melancholi . get you home ; 
 go . 
 mrs. ford . faith , thou hast some crotchet in thi head now . 
 will you go , mistress page ? 
 
 enter mistress quickli 
 
 mrs. page . have with you . you 'll come to dinner , georg ? 
 [ asid to mrs. ford ] look who come yonder ; she shall 
 be our messeng to thi paltri knight . 
 mrs. ford . [ asid to mrs. page ] trust me , i thought on 
 her ; she 'll fit it . 
 mrs. page . you are come to see my daughter ann ? 
 quickli . ay , forsooth ; and , i pray , how doe good mistress ann ? 
 mrs. page . go in with us and see ; we have an hour 's talk 
 with you . exeunt mistress page , mistress ford , and 
 mistress quickli 
 page . how now , master ford ! 
 ford . you heard what thi knave told me , did you not ? 
 page . ye ; and you heard what the other told me ? 
 ford . do you think there is truth in them ? 
 page . hang 'em , slave ! i do not think the knight would offer it ; 
 but these that accus him in hi intent toward our 
 wive are a yoke of hi discard men ; veri rogu , now 
 they be out of servic . 
 ford . were they hi men ? 
 page . marri , were they . 
 ford . i like it never the better for that . doe he lie at the 
 garter ? 
 page . ay , marri , doe he . if he should intend thi voyag 
 toward my wife , i would turn her loos to him ; and what 
 he get more of her than sharp word , let it lie on my head . 
 ford . i do not misdoubt my wife ; but i would be loath to 
 turn them togeth . a man may be too confid . i would 
 have noth lie on my head . i can not be thu satisfi . 
 
 enter host 
 
 page . look where my rant host of the garter come . 
 there is either liquor in hi pate or money in hi purs 
 when he look so merrili . how now , mine host ! 
 host . how now , bulli rook ! thou'rt a gentleman . [ to 
 shallow follow ] cavaleiro justic , i say . 
 
 enter shallow 
 
 shallow . i follow , mine host , i follow . good even and 
 twenti , good master page ! master page , will you go with 
 us ? we have sport in hand . 
 host . tell him , cavaleiro justic ; tell him , bulli rook . 
 shallow . sir , there is a fray to be fought between sir hugh 
 the welsh priest and caiu the french doctor . 
 ford . good mine host o ' th ' garter , a word with you . 
 host . what say'st thou , my bulli rook ? [ they go asid ] 
 shallow . [ to page ] will you go with us to behold it ? my 
 merri host hath had the measur of their weapon ; and , 
 i think , hath appoint them contrari place ; for , believ 
 me , i hear the parson is no jester . hark , i will tell you 
 what our sport shall be . [ they convers apart ] 
 host . hast thou no suit against my knight , my guest-cavaleiro . 
 ford . none , i protest ; but i 'll give you a pottl of burnt 
 sack to give me recours to him , and tell him my name is 
 brook-onli for a jest . 
 host . my hand , bulli ; thou shalt have egress and regress- 
 said i well ? -and thi name shall be brook . it is a merri 
 knight . will you go , mynheer ? 
 shallow . have with you , mine host . 
 page . i have heard the frenchman hath good skill in hi 
 rapier . 
 shallow . tut , sir , i could have told you more . in these 
 time you stand on distanc , your pass , stoccado , and 
 i know not what . 't is the heart , master page ; 't is here , 
 't is here . i have seen the time with my long sword i would 
 have made you four tall fellow skip like rat . 
 host . here , boy , here , here ! shall we wag ? 
 page . have with you . i had rather hear them scold than 
 fight . exeunt all but ford 
 ford . though page be a secur fool , and stand so firmli on 
 hi wife 's frailti , yet i can not put off my opinion so 
 easili . she wa in hi compani at page 's hous , and what 
 they made there i know not . well , i will look further into 
 't , and i have a disguis to sound falstaff . if i find her 
 honest , i lose not my labour ; if she be otherwis , 't is labour 
 well bestow . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 a room in the garter inn 
 
 enter falstaff and pistol 
 
 falstaff . i will not lend thee a penni . 
 pistol . i will retort the sum in equipag . 
 falstaff . not a penni . 
 pistol . whi , then the world 's mine oyster . which i with 
 sword will open . 
 falstaff . not a penni . i have been content , sir , you should 
 lay my counten to pawn . i have grate upon my good 
 friend for three repriev for you and your coach-fellow , 
 nym ; or els you had look 'd through the grate , like a 
 gemini of baboon . i am damn 'd in hell for swear to 
 gentlemen my friend you were good soldier and tall fellow ; 
 and when mistress bridget lost the handl of her fan , 
 i took 't upon mine honour thou hadst it not . 
 pistol . didst not thou share ? hadst thou not fifteen penc ? 
 falstaff . reason , you rogu , reason . think'st thou i 'll 
 endang my soul grati ? at a word , hang no more about me , 
 i am no gibbet for you . go-a short knife and a throng ! - 
 to your manor of pickt-hatch ; go . you 'll not bear a letter 
 for me , you rogu ! you stand upon your honour ! whi , 
 thou unconfin base , it is as much as i can do to 
 keep the term of my honour precis . i , i , i myself 
 sometim , leav the fear of god on the left hand , and hide 
 mine honour in my necess , am fain to shuffl , to hedg , 
 and to lurch ; and yet you , rogu , will ensconc your rag , 
 your cat-a-mountain look , your red-lattic phrase , and 
 your bold-beat oath , under the shelter of your honour ! 
 you will not do it , you ! 
 pistol . i do relent ; what would thou more of man ? 
 
 enter robin 
 
 robin . sir , here 's a woman would speak with you . 
 falstaff . let her approach . 
 
 enter mistress quickli 
 
 quickli . give your worship good morrow . 
 falstaff . good morrow , good wife . 
 quickli . not so , a n't pleas your worship . 
 falstaff . good maid , then . 
 quickli . i 'll be sworn ; 
 as my mother wa , the first hour i wa born . 
 falstaff . i do believ the swearer . what with me ? 
 quickli . shall i vouchsaf your worship a word or two ? 
 falstaff . two thousand , fair woman ; and i 'll vouchsaf 
 thee the hear . 
 quickli . there is one mistress ford , sir-i pray , come a littl 
 nearer thi way . i myself dwell with master doctor 
 caiu . 
 falstaff . well , on : mistress ford , you say- 
 quickli . your worship say veri true . i pray your worship 
 come a littl nearer thi way . 
 falstaff . i warrant thee nobodi hears-min own peopl , 
 mine own peopl . 
 quickli . are they so ? god bless them , and make them hi 
 servant ! 
 falstaff . well ; mistress ford , what of her ? 
 quickli . whi , sir , she 's a good creatur . lord , lord , your 
 worship 's a wanton ! well , heaven forgiv you , and all of 
 us , i pray . 
 falstaff . mistress ford ; come , mistress ford- 
 quickli . marri , thi is the short and the long of it : you 
 have brought her into such a canari as 't is wonder . 
 the best courtier of them all , when the court lay at windsor , 
 could never have brought her to such a canari . yet 
 there ha been knight , and lord , and gentlemen , with 
 their coach ; i warrant you , coach after coach , letter after 
 letter , gift after gift ; smell so sweetli , all musk , and so 
 rushl , i warrant you , in silk and gold ; and in such allig 
 term ; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the 
 fairest , that would have won ani woman 's heart ; and i 
 warrant you , they could never get an eye-wink of her . 
 i had myself twenti angel given me thi morn ; but i 
 defi all angel , in ani such sort , as they say , but in the 
 way of honesti ; and , i warrant you , they could never get 
 her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all ; 
 and yet there ha been earl , nay , which is more , 
 pension ; but , i warrant you , all is one with her . 
 falstaff . but what say she to me ? be brief , my good she- 
 mercuri . 
 quickli . marri , she hath receiv 'd your letter ; for the 
 which she thank you a thousand time ; and she give you 
 to notifi that her husband will be absenc from hi hous 
 between ten and eleven . 
 falstaff . ten and eleven ? 
 quickli . ay , forsooth ; and then you may come and see 
 the pictur , she say , that you wot of . master ford , her 
 husband , will be from home . ala , the sweet woman lead 
 an ill life with him ! he 's a veri jealousi man ; she lead a 
 veri frampold life with him , good heart . 
 falstaff . ten and eleven . woman , commend me to her ; i 
 will not fail her . 
 quickli . whi , you say well . but i have anoth messeng 
 to your worship . mistress page hath her hearti commend 
 to you too ; and let me tell you in your ear , she 's as 
 fartuou a civil modest wife , and one , i tell you , that will 
 not miss you morn nor even prayer , as ani is in 
 windsor , whoe'er be the other ; and she bade me tell your 
 worship that her husband is seldom from home , but she 
 hope there will come a time . i never knew a woman so 
 dote upon a man : sure i think you have charm , la ! ye , 
 in truth . 
 falstaff . not i , i assur thee ; set the attract of my 
 good part asid , i have no other charm . 
 quickli . bless on your heart for 't ! 
 falstaff . but , i pray thee , tell me thi : ha ford 's wife and 
 page 's wife acquaint each other how they love me ? 
 quickli . that were a jest inde ! they have not so littl 
 grace , i hope-that were a trick inde ! but mistress page 
 would desir you to send her your littl page of all love . 
 her husband ha a marvel infect to the littl page ; 
 and truli master page is an honest man . never a wife in 
 windsor lead a better life than she doe ; do what she will , 
 say what she will , take all , pay all , go to bed when she 
 list , rise when she list , all is as she will ; and truli she 
 deserv it ; for if there be a kind woman in windsor , she 
 is one . you must send her your page ; no remedi . 
 falstaff . whi , i will . 
 quickli . nay , but do so then ; and , look you , he may come 
 and go between you both ; and in ani case have a 
 nay-word , that you may know one anoth 's mind , and the boy 
 never need to understand ani thing ; for 't is not good that 
 children should know ani wicked . old folk , you 
 know , have discret , as they say , and know the world . 
 falstaff . fare thee well ; commend me to them both . 
 there 's my purs ; i am yet thi debtor . boy , go along with 
 thi woman . [ exeunt quickli and robin ] thi news 
 distract me . 
 pistol . [ asid ] thi punk is one of cupid 's carrier ; 
 clap on more sail ; pursu ; up with your fight ; 
 give fire ; she is my prize , or ocean whelm them all ! exit 
 falstaff . say'st thou so , old jack ; go thi way ; i 'll make 
 more of thi old bodi than i have done . will they yet look 
 after thee ? wilt thou , after the expens of so much money , 
 be now a gainer ? good bodi , i thank thee . let them say 
 't is grossli done ; so it be fairli done , no matter . 
 
 enter bardolph 
 
 bardolph . sir john , there 's one master brook below would 
 fain speak with you , and be acquaint with you ; and hath 
 sent your worship a mome 's draught of sack . 
 falstaff . brook is hi name ? 
 bardolph . ay , sir . 
 falstaff . call him in . [ exit bardolph ] such brook are 
 welcom to me , that o'erflow such liquor . ah , ha ! mistress 
 ford and mistress page , have i encompass 'd you ? go to ; 
 via ! 
 
 re-ent bardolph , with ford disguis 
 
 ford . bless you , sir ! 
 falstaff . and you , sir ! would you speak with me ? 
 ford . i make bold to press with so littl prepar upon 
 you . 
 falstaff . you 're welcom . what 's your will ? give us leav , 
 drawer . exit bardolph 
 ford . sir , i am a gentleman that have spent much ; my name 
 is brook . 
 falstaff . good master brook , i desir more acquaint 
 of you . 
 ford . good sir john , i sue for yours-not to charg you ; for i 
 must let you understand i think myself in better plight for 
 a lender than you are ; the which hath someth 
 embold'n me to thi unseason 'd intrus ; for they say , if 
 money go befor , all way do lie open . 
 falstaff . money is a good soldier , sir , and will on . 
 ford . troth , and i have a bag of money here troubl me ; if 
 you will help to bear it , sir john , take all , or half , for eas 
 me of the carriag . 
 falstaff . sir , i know not how i may deserv to be your 
 porter . 
 ford . i will tell you , sir , if you will give me the hear . 
 falstaff . speak , good master brook ; i shall be glad to be 
 your servant . 
 ford . sir , i hear you are a scholar-i will be brief with you 
 -and you have been a man long known to me , though i 
 had never so good mean as desir to make myself acquaint 
 with you . i shall discov a thing to you , wherein 
 i must veri much lay open mine own imperfect ; but , 
 good sir john , as you have one eye upon my folli , as you 
 hear them unfold , turn anoth into the regist of your 
 own , that i may pass with a reproof the easier , sith you 
 yourself know how easi is it to be such an offend . 
 falstaff . veri well , sir ; proceed . 
 ford . there is a gentlewoman in thi town , her husband 's 
 name is ford . 
 falstaff . well , sir . 
 ford . i have long lov 'd her , and , i protest to you , bestow 
 much on her ; follow her with a dote observ ; 
 engross 'd opportun to meet her ; fee 'd everi slight occas 
 that could but niggardli give me sight of her ; not 
 onli bought mani present to give her , but have given 
 larg to mani to know what she would have given ; 
 briefli , i have pursu 'd her as love hath pursu me ; which 
 hath been on the wing of all occas . but whatsoev i 
 have merit , either in my mind or in my mean , meed , i 
 am sure , i have receiv none , unless experi be a jewel ; 
 that i have purchas at an infinit rate , and that hath 
 taught me to say thi : 
 'love like a shadow fli when substanc love pursu ; 
 pursu that that fli , and fli what pursu . ' 
 falstaff . have you receiv 'd no promis of satisfact at 
 her hand ? 
 ford . never . 
 falstaff . have you importun 'd her to such a purpos ? 
 ford . never . 
 falstaff . of what qualiti wa your love , then ? 
 ford . like a fair hous built on anoth man 's ground ; so 
 that i have lost my edific by mistak the place where 
 erect it . 
 falstaff . to what purpos have you unfold thi to me ? 
 ford . when i have told you that , i have told you all . some 
 say that though she appear honest to me , yet in other 
 place she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd 
 construct made of her . now , sir john , here is the heart 
 of my purpos : you are a gentleman of excel 
 breed , admir discours , of great admitt , authent in 
 your place and person , gener allow 'd for your mani 
 war-lik , courtlik , and learn prepar . 
 falstaff . o , sir ! 
 ford . believ it , for you know it . there is money ; spend it , 
 spend it ; spend more ; spend all i have ; onli give me so 
 much of your time in exchang of it as to lay an amiabl 
 sieg to the honesti of thi ford 's wife ; use your art of 
 woo , win her to consent to you ; if ani man may , you 
 may as soon as ani . 
 falstaff . would it appli well to the vehem of your 
 affect , that i should win what you would enjoy ? 
 methink you prescrib to yourself veri preposter . 
 ford . o , understand my drift . she dwell so secur on the 
 excel of her honour that the folli of my soul dare 
 not present itself ; she is too bright to be look 'd against . 
 now , could i come to her with ani detect in my hand , 
 my desir had instanc and argument to commend themselv ; 
 i could drive her then from the ward of her puriti , 
 her reput , her marriag vow , and a thousand other her 
 defenc , which now are too too strongli embattl 'd against 
 me . what say you to't , sir john ? 
 falstaff . master brook , i will first make bold with your 
 money ; next , give me your hand ; and last , as i am a gentleman , 
 you shall , if you will , enjoy ford 's wife . 
 ford . o good sir ! 
 falstaff . i say you shall . 
 ford . want no money , sir john ; you shall want none . 
 falstaff . want no mistress ford , master brook ; you shall 
 want none . i shall be with her , i may tell you , by her own 
 appoint ; even as you came in to me her assist , or 
 go-between , part from me ; i say i shall be with her between 
 ten and eleven ; for at that time the jealou rascal 
 knave , her husband , will be forth . come you to me at 
 night ; you shall know how i speed . 
 ford . i am blest in your acquaint . do you know ford , 
 sir ? 
 falstaff . hang him , poor cuckoldli knave ! i know him 
 not ; yet i wrong him to call him poor ; they say the 
 jealou wittolli knave hath mass of money ; for the which 
 hi wife seem to me well-favour 'd . i will use her as the 
 key of the cuckoldli rogu 's coffer ; and there 's my harvest-hom . 
 ford . i would you knew ford , sir , that you might avoid him 
 if you saw him . 
 falstaff . hang him , mechan salt-butt rogu ! i will 
 stare him out of hi wit ; i will awe him with my cudgel ; 
 it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold 's horn . master 
 brook , thou shalt know i will predomin over the 
 peasant , and thou shalt lie with hi wife . come to me soon at 
 night . ford 's a knave , and i will aggrav hi style ; thou , 
 master brook , shalt know him for knave and cuckold . 
 come to me soon at night . exit 
 ford . what a damn 'd epicurean rascal is thi ! my heart is 
 readi to crack with impati . who say thi is improvid 
 jealousi ? my wife hath sent to him ; the hour is fix 'd ; 
 the match is made . would ani man have thought thi ? see 
 the hell of have a fals woman ! my bed shall be abu 'd , 
 my coffer ransack 'd , my reput gnawn at ; and i shall 
 not onli receiv thi villain wrong , but stand under the 
 adopt of abomin term , and by him that doe me 
 thi wrong . term ! name ! amaimon sound well ; lucif , 
 well ; barbason , well ; yet they are devil ' addit , the name 
 of fiend . but cuckold ! wittol ! cuckold ! the devil himself 
 hath not such a name . page is an ass , a secur ass ; he will trust 
 hi wife ; he will not be jealou ; i will rather trust a fleme 
 with my butter , parson hugh the welshman with my 
 chees , an irishman with my aqua-vita bottl , or a thief to 
 walk my ambl geld , than my wife with herself . then 
 she plot , then she rumin , then she devis ; and what 
 they think in their heart they may effect , they will break 
 their heart but they will effect . god be prai 'd for my 
 jealousi ! eleven o'clock the hour . i will prevent thi , detect 
 my wife , be reveng 'd on falstaff , and laugh at page . 
 i will about it ; better three hour too soon than a minut 
 too late . fie , fie , fie ! cuckold ! cuckold ! cuckold ! exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 a field near windsor 
 
 enter caiu and rugbi 
 
 caiu . jack rugbi ! 
 rugbi . sir ? 
 caiu . vat is de clock , jack ? 
 rugbi . 't is past the hour , sir , that sir hugh promi 'd to 
 meet . 
 caiu . by gar , he ha save hi soul dat he is no come ; he ha 
 pray hi pibl well dat he is no come ; by gar , jack rugbi , 
 he is dead alreadi , if he be come . 
 rugbi . he is wise , sir ; he knew your worship would kill 
 him if he came . 
 caiu . by gar , de her is no dead so as i vill kill him . take 
 your rapier , jack ; i vill tell you how i vill kill him . 
 rugbi . ala , sir , i can not fenc ! 
 caiu . villaini , take your rapier . 
 rugbi . forbear ; here 's compani . 
 
 enter host , shallow , slender , and page 
 
 host . bless thee , bulli doctor ! 
 shallow . save you , master doctor caiu ! 
 page . now , good master doctor ! 
 slender . give you good morrow , sir . 
 caiu . vat be all you , one , two , tree , four , come for ? 
 host . to see thee fight , to see thee foin , to see thee travers ; 
 to see thee here , to see thee there ; to see thee pass thi 
 punto , thi stock , thi revers , thi distanc , thi montant . 
 is he dead , my ethiopian ? is he dead , my francisco ? ha , 
 bulli ! what say my aesculapiu ? my galen ? my heart 
 of elder ? ha ! is he dead , bulli stale ? is he dead ? 
 caiu . by gar , he is de coward jack priest of de world ; he is 
 not show hi face . 
 host . thou art a castalion-king-urin . hector of greec , 
 my boy ! 
 caiu . i pray you , bear wit that me have stay six or 
 seven , two tree hour for him , and he is no come . 
 shallow . he is the wiser man , master doctor : he is a curer 
 of soul , and you a curer of bodi ; if you should fight , 
 you go against the hair of your profess . is it not true , 
 master page ? 
 page . master shallow , you have yourself been a great fighter , 
 though now a man of peac . 
 shallow . bodykin , master page , though i now be old , and 
 of the peac , if i see a sword out , my finger itch to make 
 one . though we are justic , and doctor , and churchmen , 
 master page , we have some salt of our youth in us ; we are 
 the son of women , master page . 
 page . 't is true , master shallow . 
 shallow . it will be found so , master page . master doctor 
 caiu , i come to fetch you home . i am sworn of the peac ; 
 you have show 'd yourself a wise physician , and sir hugh 
 hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman . you 
 must go with me , master doctor . 
 host . pardon , guest justic . a word , mounseur mockwat . 
 caiu . mock-vat ! vat is dat ? 
 host . mockwat , in our english tongu , is valour , bulli . 
 caiu . by gar , then i have as much mockvat as de englishman . 
 scurvi jack-dog priest ! by gar , me vill cut hi ear . 
 host . he will clapper-claw thee tightli , bulli . 
 caiu . clapper-de-claw ! vat is dat ? 
 host . that is , he will make thee amend . 
 caiu . by gar , me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me ; for , 
 by gar , me vill have it . 
 host . and i will provok him to't , or let him wag . 
 caiu . me tank you for dat . 
 host . and , moreov , bully-but first : [ asid to the other ] 
 master guest , and master page , and eke cavaleiro slender , 
 go you through the town to frogmor . 
 page . [ asid ] sir hugh is there , is he ? 
 host . [ asid ] he is there . see what humour he is in ; and 
 i will bring the doctor about by the field . will it do well ? 
 shallow . [ asid ] we will do it . 
 page , shallow , and slender . adieu , good master doctor . 
 exeunt page , shallow , and slender 
 caiu . by gar , me vill kill de priest ; for he speak for a jack- 
 an-ap to ann page . 
 host . let him die . sheath thi impati ; throw cold water 
 on thi choler ; go about the field with me through frogmor ; 
 i will bring thee where mistress ann page is , at a a 
 farm-hous , a-feast ; and thou shalt woo her . cri 
 game ! said i well ? 
 caiu . by gar , me dank you vor dat ; by gar , i love you ; and 
 i shall procure-a you de good guest , de earl , de knight , de 
 lord , de gentlemen , my patient . 
 host . for the which i will be thi adversari toward ann 
 page . said i well ? 
 caiu . by gar , 't is good ; vell said . 
 host . let us wag , then . 
 caiu . come at my heel , jack rugbi . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii scene < num > . 
 
 a field near frogmor 
 
 enter sir hugh evan and simpl 
 
 evan . i pray you now , good master slender 's serving-man , 
 and friend simpl by your name , which way have you 
 look 'd for master caiu , that call himself doctor of 
 physic ? 
 simpl . marri , sir , the pittie-ward , the park-ward ; everi 
 way ; old windsor way , and everi way but the town way . 
 evan . i most fehement desir you you will also look that 
 way . 
 simpl . i will , sir . exit 
 evan . pless my soul , how full of chollor i am , and trempl 
 of mind ! i shall be glad if he have deceiv me . how 
 melancholi i am ! i will knog hi urin about hi knave 's 
 costard when i have goot opportun for the ork . pless 
 my soul ! [ sing ] 
 to shallow river , to whose fall 
 melodi bird sing madrig ; 
 there will we make our ped of rose , 
 and a thousand fragrant posi . 
 to shallow- 
 merci on me ! i have a great disposit to cri . [ sing ] 
 melodi bird sing madrigals- 
 whena i sat in pabylon- 
 and a thousand vagram posi . 
 to shallow , etc . 
 
 re-ent simpl 
 
 simpl . yonder he is , come thi way , sir hugh . 
 evan . he 's welcom . [ sing ] 
 to shallow river , to whose falls- 
 heaven prosper the right ! what weapon is he ? 
 simpl . no weapon , sir . there come my master , master 
 shallow , and anoth gentleman , from frogmor , over the 
 stile , thi way . 
 evan . pray you give me my gown ; or els keep it in your 
 arm . [ take out a book ] 
 
 enter page , shallow , and slender 
 
 shallow . how now , master parson ! good morrow , good 
 sir hugh . keep a gamest from the dice , and a good student 
 from hi book , and it is wonder . 
 slender . [ asid ] ah , sweet ann page ! 
 page . save you , good sir hugh ! 
 evan . pless you from hi merci sake , all of you ! 
 shallow . what , the sword and the word ! do you studi 
 them both , master parson ? 
 page . and youth still , in your doublet and hose , thi raw 
 rheumat day ! 
 evan . there is reason and caus for it . 
 page . we are come to you to do a good offic , master 
 parson . 
 evan . feri well ; what is it ? 
 page . yonder is a most reverend gentleman , who , belik have 
 receiv wrong by some person , is at most odd with 
 hi own graviti and patienc that ever you saw . 
 shallow . i have live fourscor year and upward ; i never 
 heard a man of hi place , graviti , and learn , so wide of 
 hi own respect . 
 evan . what is he ? 
 page . i think you know him : master doctor caiu , the 
 renown french physician . 
 evan . got 's will and hi passion of my heart ! i had as lief 
 you would tell me of a mess of porridg . 
 page . whi ? 
 evan . he ha no more knowledg in hibocr and 
 galen , and he is a knave besides-a cowardli knave as you 
 would desir to be acquaint withal . 
 page . i warrant you , he 's the man should fight with him . 
 slender . [ asid ] o sweet ann page ! 
 shallow . it appear so , by hi weapon . keep them asund ; 
 here come doctor caiu . 
 
 enter host , caiu , and rugbi 
 
 page . nay , good master parson , keep in your weapon . 
 shallow . so do you , good master doctor . 
 host . disarm them , and let them question ; let them keep 
 their limb whole and hack our english . 
 caiu . i pray you , let-a me speak a word with your ear . 
 verefor will you not meet-a me ? 
 evan . [ asid to caiu ] pray you use your patienc ; in 
 good time . 
 caiu . by gar , you are de coward , de jack dog , john ape . 
 evan . [ asid to caiu ] pray you , let us not be 
 laughing-stock to other men 's humour ; i desir you in 
 friendship , and i will one way or other make you amend . 
 [ aloud ] i will knog your urin about your knave 's cogscomb 
 for miss your meet and appoint . 
 caiu . diabl ! jack rugby-min host de jarteer-hav i 
 not stay for him to kill him ? have i not , at de place i did 
 appoint ? 
 evan . as i am a christian soul , now , look you , thi is the 
 place appoint . i 'll be judgment by mine host of the 
 garter . 
 host . peac , i say , gallia and gaul , french and welsh , 
 soul-cur and body-cur . 
 caiu . ay , dat is veri good ! excel ! 
 host . peac , i say . hear mine host of the garter . am i 
 polit ? am i subtl ? am i a machiavel ? shall i lose my 
 doctor ? no ; he give me the potion and the motion . shall i 
 lose my parson , my priest , my sir hugh ? no ; he give me 
 the proverb and the noverb . give me thi hand , terrestri ; 
 so . give me thi hand , celesti ; so . boy of art , i have 
 deceiv 'd you both ; i have direct you to wrong place ; 
 your heart are mighti , your skin are whole , and let burnt 
 sack be the issu . come , lay their sword to pawn . follow 
 me , lad of peac ; follow , follow , follow . 
 shallow . trust me , a mad host . follow , gentlemen , follow . 
 slender . [ asid ] o sweet ann page ! 
 exeunt all but caiu and evan 
 caiu . ha , do i perceiv dat ? have you make-a de sot of us , 
 ha , ha ? 
 evan . thi is well ; he ha made us hi vlouting-stog . i 
 desir you that we may be friend ; and let us knog our prain 
 togeth to be reveng on thi same scall , scurvi , cog 
 companion , the host of the garter . 
 caiu . by gar , with all my heart . he promis to bring me 
 where is ann page ; by gar , he deceiv me too . 
 evan . well , i will smite hi noddl . pray you follow . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the street in windsor 
 
 enter mistress page and robin 
 
 mrs. page . nay , keep your way , littl gallant ; you were 
 wont to be a follow , but now you are a leader . whether 
 had you rather lead mine eye , or eye your master 's heel ? 
 robin . i had rather , forsooth , go befor you like a man than 
 follow him like a dwarf . 
 mrs. page . o , you are a flatter boy ; now i see you 'll be a 
 courtier . 
 
 enter ford 
 
 ford . well met , mistress page . whither go you ? 
 mrs. page . truli , sir , to see your wife . is she at home ? 
 ford . ay ; and as idl as she may hang togeth , for want of 
 compani . i think , if your husband were dead , you two 
 would marri . 
 mrs. page . be sure of that-two other husband . 
 ford . where had you thi pretti weathercock ? 
 mrs. page . i can not tell what the dicken hi name is my 
 husband had him of . what do you call your knight 's 
 name , sirrah ? 
 robin . sir john falstaff . 
 ford . sir john falstaff ! 
 mrs. page . he , he ; i can never hit on 's name . there is such 
 a leagu between my good man and he ! is your wife at 
 home inde ? 
 ford . inde she is . 
 mrs. page . by your leav , sir . i am sick till i see her . 
 exeunt mrs. page and robin 
 ford . ha page ani brain ? hath he ani eye ? hath he ani 
 think ? sure , they sleep ; he hath no use of them . whi , 
 thi boy will carri a letter twenti mile as easi as a cannon 
 will shoot pointblank twelv score . he piec out hi wife 's 
 inclin ; he give her folli motion and advantag ; and 
 now she 's go to my wife , and falstaff 's boy with her . a 
 man may hear thi show ' r sing in the wind . and falstaff 's 
 boy with her ! good plot ! they are laid ; and our revolt 
 wive share damnat togeth . well ; i will take him , 
 then tortur my wife , pluck the borrow veil of modesti 
 from the so seem mistress page , divulg page himself 
 for a secur and wil actaeon ; and to these violent proceed 
 all my neighbour shall cri aim . [ clock strike ] 
 the clock give me my cue , and my assur bid me 
 search ; there i shall find falstaff . i shall be rather prai 'd 
 for thi than mock 'd ; for it is as posit as the earth is firm 
 that falstaff is there . i will go . 
 
 enter page , shallow , slender , host , sir hugh evan , 
 caiu , and rugbi 
 
 shallow , page , & c. well met , master ford . 
 ford . trust me , a good knot ; i have good cheer at home , 
 and i pray you all go with me . 
 shallow . i must excus myself , master ford . 
 slender . and so must i , sir ; we have appoint to dine with 
 mistress ann , and i would not break with her for more 
 money than i 'll speak of . 
 shallow . we have linger 'd about a match between ann 
 page and my cousin slender , and thi day we shall have 
 our answer . 
 slender . i hope i have your good will , father page . 
 page . you have , master slender ; i stand wholli for you . but 
 my wife , master doctor , is for you altogeth . 
 caiu . ay , be-gar ; and de maid is love-a me ; my nursh-a 
 quickli tell me so mush . 
 host . what say you to young master fenton ? he caper , 
 he danc , he ha eye of youth , he write vers , he speak 
 holiday , he smell april and may ; he will carri 't , he will 
 carri 't ; 't is in hi button ; he will carri 't . 
 page . not by my consent , i promis you . the gentleman is 
 of no have : he kept compani with the wild princ and 
 poin ; he is of too high a region , he know too much . no , 
 he shall not knit a knot in hi fortun with the finger of 
 my substanc ; if he take her , let him take her simpli ; the 
 wealth i have wait on my consent , and my consent goe 
 not that way . 
 ford . i beseech you , heartili , some of you go home with me 
 to dinner : besid your cheer , you shall have sport ; i will 
 show you a monster . master doctor , you shall go ; so shall 
 you , master page ; and you , sir hugh . 
 shallow . well , fare you well ; we shall have the freer 
 woo at master page 's . exeunt shallow and slender 
 caiu . go home , john rugbi ; i come anon . exit rugbi 
 host . farewel , my heart ; i will to my honest knight 
 falstaff , and drink canari with him . exit host 
 ford . [ asid ] i think i shall drink in pipe-win first with 
 him . i 'll make him danc . will you go , gentl ? 
 all . have with you to see thi monster . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 ford 's hous 
 
 enter mistress ford and mistress page 
 
 mrs. ford . what , john ! what , robert ! 
 mrs. page . quickli , quickli ! is the buck-basket- 
 mrs. ford . i warrant . what , robin , i say ! 
 
 enter servant with a basket 
 
 mrs. page . come , come , come . 
 mrs. ford . here , set it down . 
 mrs. page . give your men the charg ; we must be brief . 
 mrs. ford . marri , as i told you befor , john and robert , be 
 readi here hard by in the brew-hous ; and when i suddenli 
 call you , come forth , and , without ani paus or 
 stagger , take thi basket on your shoulder . that done , 
 trudg with it in all hast , and carri it among the whitster 
 in datchet mead , and there empti it in the muddi ditch 
 close by the thame side . 
 mrs. page . you will do it ? 
 mrs. ford . i ha ' told them over and over ; they lack no 
 direct . be gone , and come when you are call 'd . 
 exeunt servant 
 mrs. page . here come littl robin . 
 
 enter robin 
 
 mrs. ford . how now , my eyas-musket , what news with 
 you ? 
 robin . my master sir john is come in at your back-door , 
 mistress ford , and request your compani . 
 mrs. page . you littl jack-a-l , have you been true to us ? 
 robin . ay , i 'll be sworn . my master know not of your 
 be here , and hath threat'n to put me into everlast 
 liberti , if i tell you of it ; for he swear he 'll turn me away . 
 mrs. page . thou 'rt a good boy ; thi secreci of thine shall 
 be a tailor to thee , and shall make thee a new doublet and 
 hose . i 'll go hide me . 
 mrs. ford . do so . go tell thi master i am alon . [ exit 
 robin ] mistress page , rememb you your cue . 
 mrs. page . i warrant thee ; if i do not act it , hiss me . 
 exit mrs. page 
 mrs. ford . go to , then ; we 'll use thi unwholesom 
 humid , thi gross wat'ri pumpion ; we 'll teach him to 
 know turtl from jay . 
 
 enter falstaff 
 
 falstaff . have i caught thee , my heavenli jewel ? 
 whi , now let me die , for i have liv 'd long enough ; thi is 
 the period of my ambit . o thi bless hour ! 
 mrs. ford . o sweet sir john ! 
 falstaff . mistress ford , i can not cog , i can not prate , 
 mistress ford . now shall i sin in my wish ; i would thi 
 husband were dead ; i 'll speak it befor the best lord , i 
 would make thee my ladi . 
 mrs. ford . i your ladi , sir john ? ala , i should be a piti 
 ladi . 
 falstaff . let the court of franc show me such anoth . i 
 see how thine eye would emul the diamond ; thou hast 
 the right arch beauti of the brow that becom the 
 ship-tir , the tire-vali , or ani tire of venetian admitt . 
 mrs. ford . a plain kerchief , sir john ; my brow becom 
 noth els , nor that well neither . 
 falstaff . by the lord , thou art a tyrant to say so ; thou 
 wouldst make an absolut courtier , and the firm fixtur of 
 thi foot would give an excel motion to thi gait in a 
 semi-circl farthingal . i see what thou wert , if fortun 
 thi foe were , not natur , thi friend . come , thou canst not 
 hide it . 
 mrs. ford . believ me , there 's no such thing in me . 
 falstaff . what made me love thee ? let that persuad thee 
 there 's someth extra-ordinari in thee . come , i can not 
 cog , and say thou art thi and that , like a mani of these 
 lisp hawthorn-bud that come like women in men 's 
 apparel , and smell like bucklersburi in simpl time ; i 
 can not ; but i love thee , none but thee ; and thou deserv'st it . 
 mrs. ford . do not betray me , sir ; i fear you love mistress 
 page . 
 falstaff . thou mightst as well say i love to walk by the 
 counter-g , which is as hate to me as the reek of a 
 lime-kiln . 
 mrs. ford . well , heaven know how i love you ; and you 
 shall one day find it . 
 falstaff . keep in that mind ; i 'll deserv it . 
 mrs. ford . nay , i must tell you , so you do ; or els i could 
 not be in that mind . 
 robin . [ within ] mistress ford , mistress ford ! here 's 
 mistress page at the door , sweat and blow and look 
 wildli , and would need speak with you present . 
 falstaff . she shall not see me ; i will ensconc me behind 
 the arra . 
 mrs. ford . pray you , do so ; she 's a veri tattl woman . 
 [ falstaff hide himself ] 
 
 re-ent mistress page and robin 
 
 what 's the matter ? how now ! 
 mrs. page . o mistress ford , what have you done ? you 're 
 sham 'd , y'are overthrown , y'are undon for ever . 
 mrs. ford . what 's the matter , good mistress page ? 
 mrs. page . o well-a-day , mistress ford , have an honest 
 man to your husband , to give him such caus of suspicion ! 
 mrs. ford . what caus of suspicion ? 
 mrs. page . what caus of suspicion ? out upon you , how 
 am i mistook in you ! 
 mrs. ford . whi , ala , what 's the matter ? 
 mrs. page . your husband 's come hither , woman , with all 
 the offic in windsor , to search for a gentleman that he 
 say is here now in the hous , by your consent , to take an 
 ill advantag of hi absenc . you are undon . 
 mrs. ford . 't is not so , i hope . 
 mrs. page . pray heaven it be not so that you have such a 
 man here ; but 't is most certain your husband 's come , 
 with half windsor at hi heel , to search for such a one . i 
 come befor to tell you . if you know yourself clear , whi , 
 i am glad of it ; but if you have a friend here , convey , 
 convey him out . be not amaz 'd ; call all your sens to you ; 
 defend your reput , or bid farewel to your good life 
 for ever . 
 mrs. ford . what shall i do ? there is a gentleman , my dear 
 friend ; and i fear not mine own shame as much as hi peril . 
 i had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the 
 hous . 
 mrs. page . for shame , never stand 'you had rather ' and 'you 
 had rather ' ! your husband 's here at hand ; bethink you of 
 some convey ; in the hous you can not hide him . o , 
 how have you deceiv 'd me ! look , here is a basket ; if he be 
 of ani reason statur , he may creep in here ; and throw 
 foul linen upon him , as if it were go to buck , or-it is 
 whiting-time-send him by your two men to datchet 
 mead . 
 mrs. ford . he 's too big to go in there . what shall i do ? 
 falstaff . [ come forward ] let me see 't , let me see 't . o , 
 let me see 't ! i 'll in , i 'll in ; follow your friend 's counsel ; 
 i 'll in . 
 mrs. page . what , sir john falstaff ! [ asid to falstaff ] 
 are these your letter , knight ? 
 falstaff . [ asid to mrs. page ] i love thee and none but 
 thee ; help me away.-let me creep in here ; i 'll never- 
 [ get into the basket ; they cover him with foul linen ] 
 mrs. page . help to cover your master , boy . call your men , 
 mistress ford . you dissembl knight ! 
 mrs. ford . what , john ! robert ! john ! exit robin 
 
 re-ent servant 
 
 go , take up these cloth here , quickli ; where 's the 
 cowl-staff ? look how you drumbl . carri them to the laundress 
 in datchet mead ; quickli , come . 
 
 enter ford , page , caiu , and sir hugh evan 
 
 ford . pray you come near . if i suspect without caus , whi 
 then make sport at me , then let me be your jest ; i deserv 
 it . how now , whither bear you thi ? 
 servant . to the laundress , forsooth . 
 mrs. ford . whi , what have you to do whither they bear it ? 
 you were best meddl with buck-wash . 
 ford . buck ? i would i could wash myself of the buck ! 
 buck , buck , buck ! ay , buck ! i warrant you , buck ; and of 
 the season too , it shall appear . [ exeunt servant with 
 basket ] gentlemen , i have dream 'd to-night ; i 'll tell you my 
 dream . here , here , here be my key ; ascend my chamber , 
 search , seek , find out . i 'll warrant we 'll unkennel the fox . 
 let me stop thi way first . [ lock the door ] so , now 
 uncap . 
 page . good master ford , be content ; you wrong yourself 
 too much . 
 ford . true , master page . up , gentlemen , you shall see sport 
 anon ; follow me , gentlemen . exit 
 evan . thi is feri fantast humour and jealousi . 
 caiu . by gar , 't is no the fashion of franc ; it is not jealou 
 in franc . 
 page . nay , follow him , gentlemen ; see the issu of hi 
 search . exeunt evan , page , and caiu 
 mrs. page . is there not a doubl excel in thi ? 
 mrs. ford . i know not which pleas me better , that my 
 husband is deceiv , or sir john . 
 mrs. page . what a take wa he in when your husband 
 ask 'd who wa in the basket ! 
 mrs. ford . i am half afraid he will have need of wash ; so 
 throw him into the water will do him a benefit . 
 mrs. page . hang him , dishonest rascal ! i would all of the 
 same strain were in the same distress . 
 mrs. ford . i think my husband hath some special suspicion 
 of falstaff 's be here , for i never saw him so gross in hi 
 jealousi till now . 
 mrs. page . i will lay a plot to tri that , and we will yet have 
 more trick with falstaff . hi dissolut diseas will scarc 
 obey thi medicin . 
 mrs. ford . shall we send that foolish carrion , mistress 
 quickli , to him , and excus hi throw into the water , 
 and give him anoth hope , to betray him to anoth 
 punish ? 
 mrs. page . we will do it ; let him be sent for to-morrow 
 eight o'clock , to have amend . 
 
 re-ent ford , page , caiu , and sir hugh evan 
 
 ford . i can not find him ; may be the knave bragg 'd of that 
 he could not compass . 
 mrs. page . [ asid to mrs. ford ] heard you that ? 
 mrs. ford . you use me well , master ford , do you ? 
 ford . ay , i do so . 
 mrs. ford . heaven make you better than your thought ! 
 ford . amen . 
 mrs. page . you do yourself mighti wrong , master ford . 
 ford . ay , ay ; i must bear it . 
 evan . if there be ani podi in the hous , and in the 
 chamber , and in the coffer , and in the press , heaven forgiv 
 my sin at the day of judgment ! 
 caiu . be gar , nor i too ; there is no bodi . 
 page . fie , fie , master ford , are you not asham 'd ? what 
 spirit , what devil suggest thi imagin ? i would not ha ' 
 your distemp in thi kind for the wealth of windsor 
 castl . 
 ford . 't is my fault , master page ; i suffer for it . 
 evan . you suffer for a pad conscienc . your wife is as 
 honest a oman as i will desir among five thousand , and five 
 hundr too . 
 caiu . by gar , i see 't is an honest woman . 
 ford . well , i promi 'd you a dinner . come , come , walk in 
 the park . i pray you pardon me ; i will hereaft make 
 known to you whi i have done thi . come , wife , come , 
 mistress page ; i pray you pardon me ; pray heartli , 
 pardon me . 
 page . let 's go in , gentlemen ; but , trust me , we 'll mock him . 
 i do invit you to-morrow morn to my hous to breakfast ; 
 after , we 'll a-bird togeth ; i have a fine hawk for 
 the bush . shall it be so ? 
 ford . ani thing . 
 evan . if there is one , i shall make two in the compani . 
 caiu . if there be one or two , i shall make-a the turd . 
 ford . pray you go , master page . 
 evan . i pray you now , remembr to-morrow on the 
 lousi knave , mine host . 
 caiu . dat is good ; by gar , with all my heart . 
 evan . a lousi knave , to have hi gibe and hi mockeri ! 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 befor page 's hous 
 
 enter fenton and ann page 
 
 fenton . i see i can not get thi father 's love ; 
 therefor no more turn me to him , sweet nan . 
 ann . ala , how then ? 
 fenton . whi , thou must be thyself . 
 he doth object i am too great of birth ; 
 and that , my state be gall 'd with my expens , 
 i seek to heal it onli by hi wealth . 
 besid these , other bar he lay befor me , 
 my riot past , my wild societi ; 
 and tell me 't is a thing imposs 
 i should love thee but as a properti . 
 ann .. may be he tell you true . 
 fenton . no , heaven so speed me in my time to come ! 
 albeit i will confess thi father 's wealth 
 wa the first motiv that i woo 'd thee , ann ; 
 yet , woo thee , i found thee of more valu 
 than stamp in gold , or sum in seal bag ; 
 and 't is the veri rich of thyself 
 that now i aim at . 
 ann . gentl master fenton , 
 yet seek my father 's love ; still seek it , sir . 
 if opportun and humblest suit 
 can not attain it , whi then-hark you hither . 
 [ they convers apart ] 
 
 enter shallow , slender , and mistress quickli 
 
 shallow . break their talk , mistress quickli ; my kinsman 
 shall speak for himself . 
 slender . i 'll make a shaft or a bolt on 't ; 'slid , 't is but 
 ventur . 
 shallow . be not dismay 'd . 
 slender . no , she shall not dismay me . i care not for that , 
 but that i am afeard . 
 quickli . hark ye , master slender would speak a word 
 with you . 
 ann . i come to him . [ asid ] thi is my father 's choic . 
 o , what a world of vile ill-favour 'd fault 
 look handsom in three hundr pound a year ! 
 quickli . and how doe good master fenton ? pray you , a 
 word with you . 
 shallow . she 's come ; to her , coz . o boy , thou hadst a 
 father ! 
 slender . i had a father , mistress ann ; my uncl can tell 
 you good jest of him . pray you , uncl , tell mistress ann 
 the jest how my father stole two gees out of a pen , good 
 uncl . 
 shallow . mistress ann , my cousin love you . 
 slender . ay , that i do ; as well as i love ani woman in 
 gloucestershir . 
 shallow . he will maintain you like a gentlewoman . 
 slender . ay , that i will come cut and longtail , under the 
 degre of a squir . 
 shallow . he will make you a hundr and fifti pound 
 jointur . 
 ann . good master shallow , let him woo for himself . 
 shallow . marri , i thank you for it ; i thank you for that 
 good comfort . she call you , coz ; i 'll leav you . 
 ann . now , master slender- 
 slender . now , good mistress anne- 
 ann . what is your will ? 
 slender . my will ! 'od 's heartl , that 's a pretti jest 
 inde ! i ne'er made my will yet , i thank heaven ; i am not 
 such a sickli creatur , i give heaven prais . 
 ann . i mean , master slender , what would you with me ? 
 slender . truli , for mine own part i would littl or noth 
 with you . your father and my uncl hath made motion ; 
 if it be my luck , so ; if not , happi man be hi dole ! they 
 can tell you how thing go better than i can . you may ask 
 your father ; here he come . 
 
 enter page and mistress page 
 
 page . now , master slender ! love him , daughter anne- 
 whi , how now , what doe master fenton here ? 
 you wrong me , sir , thu still to haunt my hous . 
 i told you , sir , my daughter is dispo 'd of . 
 fenton . nay , master page , be not impati . 
 mrs. page . good master fenton , come not to my child . 
 page . she is no match for you . 
 fenton . sir , will you hear me ? 
 page . no , good master fenton . 
 come , master shallow ; come , son slender ; in . 
 know my mind , you wrong me , master fenton . 
 exeunt page , shallow , and slender 
 quickli . speak to mistress page . 
 fenton . good mistress page , for that i love your daughter 
 in such a righteou fashion as i do , 
 perforc , against all check , rebuk , and manner , 
 i must advanc the colour of my love , 
 and not retir . let me have your good will . 
 ann . good mother , do not marri me to yond fool . 
 mrs. page . i mean it not ; i seek you a better husband . 
 quickli . that 's my master , master doctor . 
 ann . ala , i had rather be set quick i ' th ' earth . 
 and bowl 'd to death with turnip . 
 mrs. page . come , troubl not yourself . good master 
 fenton , 
 i will not be your friend , nor enemi ; 
 my daughter will i question how she love you , 
 and as i find her , so am i affect ; 
 till then , farewel , sir ; she must need go in ; 
 her father will be angri . 
 fenton . farewel , gentl mistress ; farewel , nan . 
 exeunt mrs. page and ann 
 quickli . thi is my do now : 'nay , ' said i 'will you cast 
 away your child on a fool , and a physician ? look on 
 master fenton . ' thi is my do . 
 fenton . i thank thee ; and i pray thee , onc to-night 
 give my sweet nan thi ring . there 's for thi pain . 
 quickli . now heaven send thee good fortun ! [ exit 
 fenton ] a kind heart he hath ; a woman would run through 
 fire and water for such a kind heart . but yet i would my 
 master had mistress ann ; or i would master slender had 
 her ; or , in sooth , i would master fenton had her ; i will 
 do what i can for them all three , for so i have promi 'd , 
 and i 'll be as good as my word ; but specious for master 
 fenton . well , i must of anoth errand to sir john falstaff 
 from my two mistress . what a beast am i to slack it ! 
 exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the garter inn 
 
 enter falstaff and bardolph 
 
 falstaff . bardolph , i say ! 
 bardolph . here , sir . 
 falstaff . go fetch me a quart of sack ; put a toast in 't . 
 exit bardolph 
 have i liv 'd to be carri in a basket , like a barrow of 
 butcher 's offal , and to be thrown in the thame ? well , if 
 i be serv 'd such anoth trick , i 'll have my brain ta'en out 
 and butter 'd , and give them to a dog for a new-year 's gift . 
 the rogu slight me into the river with as littl remors 
 as they would have drown 'd a blind bitch 's puppi , fifteen 
 i ' th ' litter ; and you may know by my size that i have 
 a kind of alacr in sink ; if the bottom were as deep as 
 hell i should down . i had been drown 'd but that the shore 
 wa shelvi and shallow-a death that i abhor ; for the water 
 swell a man ; and what a thing should i have been when 
 had been swell 'd ! i should have been a mountain of 
 mummi . 
 
 re-ent bardolph , with sack 
 
 bardolph . here 's mistress quickli , sir , to speak with you 
 falstaff . come , let me pour in some sack to the thame 
 water ; for my belli 's as cold as if i had swallow 'd 
 snowbal for pill to cool the rein . call her in . 
 bardolph . come in , woman . 
 
 enter mistress quickli 
 
 quickli . by your leav ; i cri you merci . give your 
 worship good morrow . 
 falstaff . take away these chalic . go , brew me a pottl 
 of sack fine . 
 bardolph . with egg , sir ? 
 falstaff . simpl of itself ; i 'll no pullet-sperm in my 
 brewag . [ exit bardolph ] how now ! 
 quickli . marri , sir , i come to your worship from mistress 
 ford . 
 falstaff . mistress ford ! i have had ford enough ; i wa 
 thrown into the ford ; i have my belli full of ford . 
 quickli . ala the day , good heart , that wa not her fault ! 
 she doe so take on with her men ; they mistook their 
 erect . 
 falstaff . so did i mine , to build upon a foolish woman 's 
 promis . 
 quickli . well , she lament , sir , for it , that it would yearn 
 your heart to see it . her husband goe thi morn 
 a-bird ; she desir you onc more to come to her between 
 eight and nine ; i must carri her word quickli . she 'll make 
 you amend , i warrant you . 
 falstaff . well , i will visit her . tell her so ; and bid her 
 think what a man is . let her consid hi frailti , and then 
 judg of my merit . 
 quickli . i will tell her . 
 falstaff . do so . between nine and ten , say'st thou ? 
 quickli . eight and nine , sir . 
 falstaff . well , be gone ; i will not miss her . 
 quickli . peac be with you , sir . exit 
 falstaff . i marvel i hear not of master brook ; he sent me 
 word to stay within . i like hi money well . o , here he 
 come . 
 
 enter ford disguis 
 
 ford . bless you , sir ! 
 falstaff . now , master brook , you come to know what 
 hath pass 'd between me and ford 's wife ? 
 ford . that , inde , sir john , is my busi . 
 falstaff . master brook , i will not lie to you ; i wa at her 
 hous the hour she appoint me . 
 ford . and sped you , sir ? 
 falstaff . veri ill-favouredli , master brook . 
 ford . how so , sir ; did she chang her determin ? 
 falstaff . no . master brook ; but the peak cornuto her 
 husband , master brook , dwell in a continu 'larum of 
 jealousi , come me in the instant of our , encount , after 
 we had embrac 'd , kiss 'd , protest , and , as it were , spoke 
 the prologu of our comedi ; and at hi heel a rabbl of hi 
 companion , thither provok and instig by hi 
 distemp , and , forsooth , to search hi hous for hi wife 's 
 love . 
 ford . what , while you were there ? 
 falstaff . while i wa there . 
 ford . and did he search for you , and could not find you ? 
 falstaff . you shall hear . as good luck would have it , come 
 in one mistress page , give intellig of ford 's approach ; 
 and , in her invent and ford 's wife 's distract , they 
 convey 'd me into a buck-basket . 
 ford . a buck-basket ! 
 falstaff . by the lord , a buck-basket ! ramm 'd me in with 
 foul shirt and smock , sock , foul stock , greasi 
 napkin , that , master brook , there wa the rankest compound 
 of villain smell that ever offend nostril . 
 ford . and how long lay you there ? 
 falstaff . nay , you shall hear , master brook , what i have 
 suffer 'd to bring thi woman to evil for your good . be 
 thu cramm 'd in the basket , a coupl of ford 's knave , hi 
 hind , were call 'd forth by their mistress to carri me in 
 the name of foul cloth to datchet lane ; they took me on 
 their shoulder ; met the jealou knave their master in the 
 door ; who ask 'd them onc or twice what they had in their 
 basket . i quak 'd for fear lest the lunat knave would have 
 search 'd it ; but fate , ordain he should be a cuckold , 
 held hi hand . well , on went he for a search , and away 
 went i for foul cloth . but mark the sequel , master 
 brook-i suffer the pang of three sever death : first , 
 an intoler fright to be detect with a jealou rotten 
 bell-weth ; next , to be compass 'd like a good bilbo in the 
 circumfer of a peck , hilt to point , heel to head ; and 
 then , to be stopp 'd in , like a strong distil , with 
 stink cloth that fret in their own greas . think of that 
 -a man of my kidney . think of that-that am as subject to 
 heat as butter ; a man of continu dissolut and thaw . it 
 wa a miracl to scape suffoc . and in the height of 
 thi bath , when i wa more than half-stew 'd in greas , like 
 a dutch dish , to be thrown into the thame , and cool 'd , 
 glow hot , in that surg , like a horse-sho ; think of that 
 -hiss hot . think of that , master brook . 
 ford . in good sad , sir , i am sorri that for my sake you 
 have suffer 'd all thi . my suit , then , is desper ; 
 you 'll undertak her no more . 
 falstaff . master brook , i will be thrown into etna , as i 
 have been into thame , ere i will leav her thu . her 
 husband is thi morn gone a-bird ; i have receiv from 
 her anoth embassi of meet ; 'twixt eight and nine is 
 the hour , master brook . 
 ford . 't is past eight alreadi , sir . 
 falstaff . is it ? i will then address me to my appoint . 
 come to me at your conveni leisur , and you shall 
 know how i speed ; and the conclus shall be crown 
 with your enjoy her . adieu . you shall have her , master 
 brook ; master brook , you shall cuckold ford . exit 
 ford . hum ! ha ! is thi a vision ? is thi a dream ? do i sleep ? 
 master ford , awak ; awak , master ford . there 's a hole 
 made in your best coat , master ford . thi 't is to be 
 marri ; thi 't is to have linen and buck-basket ! well , i will 
 proclaim myself what i am ; i will now take the lecher ; he 
 is at my hous . he can not scape me ; 't is imposs he 
 should ; he can not creep into a halfpenni purs nor into 
 a pepper box . but , lest the devil that guid him should aid 
 him , i will search imposs place . though what i am i 
 can not avoid , yet to be what i would not shall not make 
 me tame . if i have horn to make one mad , let the proverb 
 go with me-i 'll be horn mad . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 
 windsor . a street 
 
 enter mistress page , mistress quickli , and william 
 
 mrs. page . is he at master ford 's alreadi , think'st thou ? 
 quickli . sure he is by thi ; or will be present ; but truli 
 he is veri courag mad about hi throw into the 
 water . mistress ford desir you to come suddenli . 
 mrs. page . i 'll be with her by and by ; i 'll but bring my 
 young man here to school . look where hi master come ; 
 't is a play day , i see . 
 
 enter sir hugh evan 
 
 how now , sir hugh , no school to-day ? 
 evan . no ; master slender is let the boy leav to play . 
 quickli . bless of hi heart ! 
 mrs. page . sir hugh , my husband say my son profit 
 noth in the world at hi book ; i pray you ask him some 
 question in hi accid . 
 evan . come hither , william ; hold up your head ; come . 
 mrs. page . come on , sirrah ; hold up your head ; answer your 
 master ; be not afraid . 
 evan . william , how mani number is in noun ? 
 william . two . 
 quickli . truli , i thought there had been one number 
 more , becaus they say 'od 's noun . ' 
 evan . peac your tattl . what is 'fair , ' william ? 
 william . pulcher . 
 quickli . polecat ! there are fairer thing than polecat , 
 sure . 
 evan . you are a veri simplic oman ; i pray you , peac . 
 what is 'lapi , ' william ? 
 william . a stone . 
 evan . and what is ' a stone , ' william ? 
 william . a pebbl . 
 evan . no , it is 'lapi ' ; i pray you rememb in your prain . 
 william . lapi . 
 evan . that is a good william . what is he , william , that 
 doe lend articl ? 
 william . articl are borrow of the pronoun , and be 
 thu declin : singularit , nominativo ; hic , haec , hoc . 
 evan . nominativo , hig , hag , hog ; pray you , mark : genitivo , 
 huju . well , what is your accus case ? 
 william . accusativo , hinc . 
 evan . i pray you , have your remembr , child . 
 accusativo , hung , hang , hog . 
 quickli . 'hang-hog ' is latin for bacon , i warrant you . 
 evan . leav your prabbl , oman . what is the foc 
 case , william ? 
 william . o-vocativo , o . 
 evan . rememb , william : foc is caret . 
 quickli . and that 's a good root . 
 evan . oman , forbear . 
 mrs. page . peac . 
 evan . what is your genit case plural , william ? 
 william . genit case ? 
 evan . ay . 
 william . genit : horum , harum , horum . 
 quickli . vengeanc of jenni 's case ; fie on her ! never 
 name her , child , if she be a whore . 
 evan . for shame , oman . 
 quickli . you do ill to teach the child such word . he 
 teach him to hick and to hack , which they 'll do fast 
 enough of themselv ; and to call 'horum ' ; fie upon you ! 
 evan . oman , art thou lunat ? hast thou no understand 
 for thi case , and the number of the gender ? thou 
 art as foolish christian creatur as i would desir . 
 mrs. page . prithe hold thi peac . 
 evan . show me now , william , some declens of your 
 pronoun . 
 william . forsooth , i have forgot . 
 evan . it is qui , quae , quod ; if you forget your qui 's , your 
 quae 's , and your quod 's , you must be preech . go your 
 way and play ; go . 
 mrs. page . he is a better scholar than i thought he wa . 
 evan . he is a good sprag memori . farewel , mistress page . 
 mrs. page . adieu , good sir hugh . exit sir hugh 
 get you home , boy . come , we stay too long . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 ford 's hous 
 
 enter falstaff and mistress ford 
 
 falstaff . mistress ford , your sorrow hath eaten up my 
 suffer . i see you are obsequi in your love , and i 
 profess requit to a hair 's breadth ; not onli , mistress ford , in 
 the simpl offic of love , but in all the accoutr , 
 complement , and ceremoni of it . but are you sure of your 
 husband now ? 
 mrs. ford . he 's a-bird , sweet sir john . 
 mrs. page . [ within ] what hoa , gossip ford , what hoa ! 
 mrs. ford . step into th ' chamber , sir john . exit falstaff 
 
 enter mistress page 
 
 mrs. page . how now , sweetheart , who 's at home besid 
 yourself ? 
 mrs. ford . whi , none but mine own peopl . 
 mrs. page . inde ? 
 mrs. ford . no , certainli . [ asid to her ] speak louder . 
 mrs. page . truli , i am so glad you have nobodi here . 
 mrs. ford . whi ? 
 mrs. page . whi , woman , your husband is in hi old lune 
 again . he so take on yonder with my husband ; so rail 
 against all marri mankind ; so curs an eve 's daughter , 
 of what complexion soever ; and so buffet himself on the 
 forehead , cri 'peer-out , peer-out ! ' that ani mad i 
 ever yet beheld seem 'd but tame , civil , and patienc , 
 to thi hi distemp he is in now . i am glad the fat knight 
 is not here . 
 mrs. ford . whi , doe he talk of him ? 
 mrs. page . of none but him ; and swear he wa carri out , 
 the last time he search 'd for him , in a basket ; protest to 
 my husband he is now here ; and hath drawn him and the 
 rest of their compani from their sport , to make anoth 
 experi of hi suspicion . but i am glad the knight is not 
 here ; now he shall see hi own fooleri . 
 mrs. ford . how near is he , mistress page ? 
 mrs. page . hard by , at street end ; he will be here anon . 
 mrs. ford . i am undon : the knight is here . 
 mrs. page . whi , then , you are utterli sham 'd , and he 's but 
 a dead man . what a woman are you ! away with him , 
 away with him ; better shame than murder . 
 mrs. ford . which way should he go ? how should i bestow 
 him ? shall i put him into the basket again ? 
 
 re-ent falstaff 
 
 falstaff . no , i 'll come no more i ' th ' basket . may i not go 
 out ere he come ? 
 mrs. page . ala , three of master ford 's brother watch the 
 door with pistol , that none shall issu out ; otherwis you 
 might slip away ere he came . but what make you here ? 
 falstaff . what shall i do ? i 'll creep up into the chimney . 
 mrs. ford . there they alway use to discharg their 
 birding-piec . 
 mrs. page . creep into the kiln-hol . 
 falstaff . where is it ? 
 mrs. ford . he will seek there , on my word . neither press , 
 coffer , chest , trunk , well , vault , but he hath an abstract for 
 the remembr of such place , and goe to them by hi 
 note . there is no hide you in the hous . 
 falstaff . i 'll go out then . 
 mrs. page . if you go out in your own semblanc , you die , 
 sir john . unless you go out disgui 'd . 
 mrs. ford . how might we disguis him ? 
 mrs. page . ala the day , i know not ! there is no woman 's 
 gown big enough for him ; otherwis he might put on a 
 hat , a muffler , and a kerchief , and so escap . 
 falstaff . good heart , devis someth ; ani extrem 
 rather than a mischief . 
 mrs. ford . my maid 's aunt , the fat woman of brainford , ha 
 a gown abov . 
 mrs. page . on my word , it will serv him ; she 's as big as he 
 is ; and there 's her thrumm 'd hat , and her muffler too . run 
 up , sir john . 
 mrs. ford . go , go , sweet sir john . mistress page and i will 
 look some linen for your head . 
 mrs. page . quick , quick ; we 'll come dress you straight . put 
 on the gown the while . exit falstaff 
 mrs. ford . i would my husband would meet him in thi 
 shape ; he can not abid the old woman of brainford ; he 
 swear she 's a witch , forbad her my hous , and hath 
 threat'n to beat her . 
 mrs. page . heaven guid him to thi husband 's cudgel ; and 
 the devil guid hi cudgel afterward ! 
 mrs. ford . but is my husband come ? 
 mrs. page . ay , in good sad is he ; and talk of the basket 
 too , howsoev he hath had intellig . 
 mrs. ford . we 'll tri that ; for i 'll appoint my men to carri 
 the basket again , to meet him at the door with it as they 
 did last time . 
 mrs. page . nay , but he 'll be here present ; let 's go dress 
 him like the witch of brainford . 
 mrs. ford . i 'll first direct my men what they shall do with 
 the basket . go up ; i 'll bring linen for him straight . exit 
 mrs. page . hang him , dishonest varlet ! we can not misus 
 him enough . 
 we 'll leav a proof , by that which we will do , 
 wive may be merri and yet honest too . 
 we do not act that often jest and laugh ; 
 't is old but true : still swine eat all the draff . exit 
 
 re-ent mistress ford , with two servant 
 
 mrs. ford . go , sir , take the basket again on your shoulder ; 
 your master is hard at door ; if he bid you set it down , obey 
 him ; quickli , dispatch . exit 
 first servant . come , come , take it up . 
 second servant . pray heaven it be not full of knight again . 
 first servant . i hope not ; i had lief as bear so much lead . 
 
 enter ford , page , shallow , caiu , and sir hugh evan 
 
 ford . ay , but if it prove true , master page , have you ani 
 way then to unfool me again ? set down the basket , villain ! 
 somebodi call my wife . youth in a basket ! o you panderli 
 rascal , there 's a knot , a ging , a pack , a conspiraci 
 against me . now shall the devil be sham 'd . what , wife , i 
 say ! come , come forth ; behold what honest cloth you 
 send forth to bleach . 
 page . whi , thi pass , master ford ; you are not to go loos 
 ani longer ; you must be pinion 'd . 
 evan . whi , thi is lunat . thi is mad as a mad dog . 
 shallow . inde , master ford , thi is not well , inde . 
 ford . so say i too , sir . 
 
 re-ent mistress ford 
 
 come hither , mistress ford ; mistress ford , the honest 
 woman , the modest wife , the virtuou creatur , that hath 
 the jealou fool to her husband ! i suspect without caus , 
 mistress , do i ? 
 mrs. ford . heaven be my wit , you do , if you suspect 
 me in ani dishonesti . 
 ford . well said , brazen-fac ; hold it out . come forth , sirrah . 
 [ pull cloth out of the basket ] 
 page . thi pass ! 
 mrs. ford . are you not asham 'd ? let the cloth alon . 
 ford . i shall find you anon . 
 evan . 't is unreason . will you take up your wife 's 
 cloth ? come away . 
 ford . empti the basket , i say . 
 mrs. ford . whi , man , whi ? 
 ford . master page , as i am a man , there wa one convey 'd 
 out of my hous yesterday in thi basket . whi may not 
 he be there again ? in my hous i am sure he is ; my 
 intellig is true ; my jealousi is reason . 
 pluck me out all the linen . 
 mrs. ford . if you find a man there , he shall die a flea 's 
 death . 
 page . here 's no man . 
 shallow . by my fidel , thi is not well , master ford ; thi 
 wrong you . 
 evan . master ford , you must pray , and not follow the 
 imagin of your own heart ; thi is jealousi . 
 ford . well , he 's not here i seek for . 
 page . no , nor nowher els but in your brain . 
 ford . help to search my hous thi one time . if i find not 
 what i seek , show no colour for my extrem ; let me for 
 ever be your tabl sport ; let them say of me 'a jealou as 
 ford , that search 'd a hollow walnut for hi wife 's leman . ' 
 satisfi me onc more ; onc more search with me . 
 mrs. ford . what , hoa , mistress page ! come you and the old 
 woman down ; my husband will come into the chamber . 
 ford . old woman ? what old woman 's that ? 
 mrs. ford . whi , it is my maid 's aunt of brainford . 
 ford . a witch , a quean , an old cozen quean ! have i not 
 forbid her my hous ? she come of errand , doe she ? we 
 are simpl men ; we do not know what 's brought to pass 
 under the profess of fortune-tel . she work by 
 charm , by spell , by th ' figur , and such daub'ri as thi 
 is , beyond our element . we know noth . come down , you 
 witch , you hag you ; come down , i say . 
 mrs. ford . nay , good sweet husband ! good gentlemen , let 
 him not strike the old woman . 
 
 re-ent falstaff in woman 's cloth , and mistress page 
 
 mrs. page . come , mother prat ; come . give me your hand . 
 ford . i 'll prat her . [ beat him ] out of my door , you 
 witch , you hag , you . baggag , you polecat , you ronyon ! 
 out , out ! i 'll conjur you , i 'll fortune-tel you . 
 exit falstaff 
 mrs. page . are you not asham 'd ? i think you have kill 'd the 
 poor woman . 
 mrs. ford . nay , he will do it . 't is a goodli credit for you . 
 ford . hang her , witch ! 
 evan . by yea and no , i think the oman is a witch inde ; i 
 like not when a oman ha a great peard ; i spi a great peard 
 under hi muffler . 
 ford . will you follow , gentlemen ? i beseech you follow ; 
 see but the issu of my jealousi ; if i cri out thu upon no 
 trail , never trust me when i open again . 
 page . let 's obey hi humour a littl further . come , 
 gentlemen . exeunt all but mrs. ford and mrs. page 
 mrs. page . trust me , he beat him most piti . 
 mrs. ford . nay , by th ' mass , that he did not ; he beat him 
 most unpiti methought . 
 mrs. page . i 'll have the cudgel hallow 'd and hung o'er the 
 altar ; it hath done meritori servic . 
 mrs. ford . what think you ? may we , with the warrant of 
 womanhood and the wit of a good conscienc , pursu 
 him with ani further reveng ? 
 mrs. page . the spirit of wanton is sure scar 'd out of 
 him ; if the devil have him not in fee-simpl , with fine and 
 recoveri , he will never , i think , in the way of wast , 
 attempt us again . 
 mrs. ford . shall we tell our husband how we have serv 'd 
 him ? 
 mrs. page . ye , by all mean ; if it be but to scrape the 
 figur out of your husband 's brain . if they can find in their 
 heart the poor unvirtu fat knight shall be ani further 
 afflict , we two will still be the minist . 
 mrs. ford . i 'll warrant they 'll have him publicli sham 'd ; 
 and methink there would be no period to the jest , should 
 he not be publicli sham 'd . 
 mrs. page . come , to the forg with it then ; shape it . i 
 would not have thing cool . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the garter inn 
 
 enter host and bardolph 
 
 bardolph . sir , the german desir to have three of your 
 hors ; the duke himself will be to-morrow at court , and 
 they are go to meet him . 
 host . what duke should that be come so secretli ? i hear 
 not of him in the court . let me speak with the gentlemen ; 
 they speak english ? 
 bardolph . ay , sir ; i 'll call them to you . 
 host . they shall have my hors , but i 'll make them pay ; 
 i 'll sauc them ; they have had my hous a week at 
 command ; i have turn 'd away my other guest . they must 
 come off ; i 'll sauc them . come . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > 
 
 ford 's hous 
 
 enter page , ford , mistress page , mistress ford , and sir hugh evan 
 
 evan . 't is one of the best discret of a oman as ever 
 did look upon . 
 page . and did he send you both these letter at an instant ? 
 mrs. page . within a quarter of an hour . 
 ford . pardon me , wife . henceforth , do what thou wilt ; 
 i rather will suspect the sun with cold 
 than thee with wanton . now doth thi honour stand , 
 in him that wa of late an heret , 
 as firm as faith . 
 page . 't is well , 't is well ; no more . 
 be not as extrem in submiss as in offenc ; 
 but let our plot go forward . let our wive 
 yet onc again , to make us public sport , 
 appoint a meet with thi old fat fellow , 
 where we may take him and disgrac him for it . 
 ford . there is no better way than that they spoke of . 
 page . how ? to send him word they 'll meet him in the park 
 at midnight ? fie , fie ! he 'll never come ! 
 evan . you say he ha been thrown in the river ; and ha 
 been grievous peaten as an old oman ; methink there 
 should be terror in him , that he should not come ; 
 methink hi flesh is punish 'd ; he shall have no desir . 
 page . so think i too . 
 mrs. ford . devis but how you 'll use him when he come , 
 and let us two devis to bring him thither . 
 mrs. page . there is an old tale goe that heme the hunter , 
 sometim a keeper here in windsor forest , 
 doth all the winter-tim , at still midnight , 
 walk round about an oak , with great ragg 'd horn ; 
 and there he blast the tree , and take the cattl , 
 and make milch-kin yield blood , and shake a chain 
 in a most hideou and dread manner . 
 you have heard of such a spirit , and well you know 
 the superstiti idle-head eld 
 receiv 'd , and did deliv to our age , 
 thi tale of heme the hunter for a truth . 
 page . whi yet there want not mani that do fear 
 in deep of night to walk by thi hern 's oak . 
 but what of thi ? 
 mrs. ford . marri , thi is our device- 
 that falstaff at that oak shall meet with us , 
 disgui 'd , like heme , with huge horn on hi head . 
 page . well , let it not be doubt but he 'll come , 
 and in thi shape . when you have brought him thither , 
 what shall be done with him ? what is your plot ? 
 mrs. page . that likewis have we thought upon , and 
 thu : 
 nan page my daughter , and my littl son , 
 and three or four more of their growth , we 'll dress 
 like urchin , ouph , and fairi , green and white , 
 with round of waxen taper on their head , 
 and rattl in their hand ; upon a sudden , 
 as falstaff , she , and i , are newli met , 
 let them from forth a sawpit rush at onc 
 with some diffus song ; upon their sight 
 we two in great amazed will fli . 
 then let them all encircl him about , 
 and fairy-lik , to pinch the unclean knight ; 
 and ask him whi , that hour of fairi revel , 
 in their so sacr path he dare to tread 
 in shape profan . 
 mrs. ford . and till he tell the truth , 
 let the suppos fairi pinch him sound , 
 and burn him with their taper . 
 mrs. page . the truth be known , 
 we 'll all present ourselv ; dis-horn the spirit , 
 and mock him home to windsor . 
 ford . the children must 
 be practi 'd well to thi or they 'll nev ' r do 't . 
 evan . i will teach the children their behaviour ; and i will 
 be like a jack-an-ap also , to burn the knight with my 
 taber . 
 ford . that will be excel . i 'll go buy them vizard . 
 mrs. page . my nan shall be the queen of all the fairi , 
 fine attir in a robe of white . 
 page . that silk will i go buy . [ asid ] and in that time 
 shall master slender steal my nan away , 
 and marri her at eton.-go , send to falstaff straight . 
 ford . nay , i 'll to him again , in name of brook ; 
 he 'll tell me all hi purpos . sure , he 'll come . 
 mrs. page . fear not you that . go get us properti 
 and trick for our fairi . 
 evan . let us about it . it is admir pleasur , and feri 
 honest knaveri . exeunt page , ford , and evan 
 mrs. page . go , mistress ford . 
 send quickli to sir john to know hi mind . 
 exit mrs. ford 
 i 'll to the doctor ; he hath my good will , 
 and none but he , to marri with nan page . 
 that slender , though well land , is an idiot ; 
 and he my husband best of all affect . 
 the doctor is well money 'd , and hi friend 
 potent at court ; he , none but he , shall have her , 
 though twenti thousand worthier come to crave her . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the garter inn 
 
 enter host and simpl 
 
 host . what wouldst thou have , boor ? what , thick-skin ? 
 speak , breath , discuss ; brief , short , quick , snap . 
 simpl . marri , sir , i come to speak with sir john falstaff 
 from master slender . 
 host . there 's hi chamber , hi hous , hi castl , hi 
 standing-b and truckle-b ; 't is paint about with the 
 stori of the prodig , fresh and new . go , knock and can ; he 'll 
 speak like an anthropophaginian unto thee . knock , i say . 
 simpl . there 's an old woman , a fat woman , gone up into 
 hi chamber ; i 'll be so bold as stay , sir , till she come down ; 
 i come to speak with her , inde . 
 host . ha ! a fat woman ? the knight may be robb 'd . i 'll call . 
 bulli knight ! bulli sir john ! speak from thi lung 
 militari . art thou there ? it is thine host , thine ephesian , call . 
 falstaff . [ abov ] how now , mine host ? 
 host . here 's a bohemian-tartar tarri the come down of 
 thi fat woman . let her descend , bulli , let her descend ; 
 my chamber are honour . fie , privaci , fie ! 
 
 enter falstaff 
 
 falstaff . there wa , mine host , an old fat woman even 
 now with , me ; but she 's gone . 
 simpl . pray you , sir , was't not the wise woman of 
 brainford ? 
 falstaff . ay , marri wa it , mussel-shel . what would you 
 with her ? 
 simpl . my master , sir , my master slender , sent to her , 
 see her go thorough the street , to know , sir , whether one 
 nym , sir , that beguil 'd him of a chain , had the chain or no . 
 falstaff . i spake with the old woman about it . 
 simpl . and what say she , i pray , sir ? 
 falstaff marri , she say that the veri same man that 
 beguil 'd master slender of hi chain cozen 'd him of it . 
 simpl . i would i could have spoken with the woman 
 herself ; i had other thing to have spoken with her too , 
 from him . 
 falstaff . what are they ? let us know . 
 host . ay , come ; quick . 
 simpl . i may not conceal them , sir . 
 falstaff . conceal them , or thou diest . 
 simpl .. whi , sir , they were noth but about mistress 
 ann page : to know if it were my master 's fortun to 
 have her or no . 
 falstaff . 't is , 't is hi fortun . 
 simpl . what sir ? 
 falstaff . to have her , or no . go ; say the woman told me 
 so . 
 simpl . may i be bold to say so , sir ? 
 falstaff . ay , sir , like who more bold ? 
 simple. , i thank your worship ; i shall make my master glad 
 with these tide . exit simpl 
 host . thou art clerkli , thou art clerkli , sir john . wa 
 there a wise woman with thee ? 
 falstaff . ay , that there wa , mine host ; one that hath 
 taught me more wit than ever i learn 'd befor in my life ; 
 and i paid noth for it neither , but wa paid for my 
 learn . 
 
 enter bardolph 
 
 bardolph . out , ala , sir , cozenag , mere cozenag ! 
 host . where be my hors ? speak well of them , varletto . 
 bardolph . run away with the cozen ; for so soon as i 
 came beyond eton , they threw me off from behind one of 
 them , in a slough of mire ; and set spur and away , like 
 three german devil , three doctor faustus . 
 host . they are gone but to meet the duke , villain ; do not 
 say they be fled . german are honest men . 
 
 enter sir hugh evan 
 
 evan . where is mine host ? 
 host . what is the matter , sir ? 
 evan . have a care of your entertain . there is a friend 
 of mine come to town tell me there is three 
 cozen-german that ha cozen 'd all the host of readin , 
 of maidenhead , of colebrook , of hors and money . i tell you for 
 good will , look you ; you are wise , and full of gibe and 
 vlouting-stog , and 't is not conveni you should be 
 cozen . fare you well . exit 
 
 enter doctor caiu 
 
 caiu . vere is mine host de jarteer ? 
 host . here , master doctor , in perplex and doubt 
 dilemma . 
 caiu . i can not tell vat is dat ; but it is tell-a me dat you 
 make grand prepar for a duke de jamani . by my 
 trot , dere is no duke that the court is know to come ; i 
 tell you for good will . adieu . exit 
 host . hue and cri , villain , go ! assist me , knight ; i am 
 undon . fli , run , hue and cri , villain ; i am undon . 
 exeunt host and bardolph 
 falstaff . i would all the world might be cozen 'd , for i have 
 been cozen 'd and beaten too . if it should come to the car 
 of the court how i have been transform , and how my 
 transform hath been wash 'd and cudgel 'd , they 
 would melt me out of my fat , drop by drop , and liquor 
 fishermen 's boot with me ; i warrant they would whip me 
 with their fine wit till i were as crestfall'n as a dri pear . 
 i never prosper 'd sinc i forswor myself at primero . well , 
 if my wind were but long enough to say my prayer , 
 would repent . 
 
 enter mistress quickli 
 
 now ! whenc come you ? 
 quickli . from the two parti , forsooth . 
 falstaff . the devil take one parti and hi dam the other ! 
 and so they shall be both bestow . i have suffer 'd more 
 for their sake , more than the villain inconst of 
 man 's disposit is abl to bear . 
 quickli . and have not they suffer 'd ? ye , i warrant ; 
 specious one of them ; mistress ford , good heart , is beaten 
 black and blue , that you can not see a white spot about her . 
 falstaff . what tell'st thou me of black and blue ? i wa 
 beaten myself into all the colour of the rainbow ; and 
 wa like to be apprehend for the witch of brainford . but 
 that my admir dexter of wit , my counterfeit the 
 action of an old woman , deliv 'd me , the knave constabl 
 had set me i ' th ' stock , i ' th ' common stock , for a witch . 
 quickli . sir , let me speak with you in your chamber ; you 
 shall hear how thing go , and , i warrant , to your content . 
 here is a letter will say somewhat . good heart , what ado 
 here is to bring you togeth ! sure , one of you doe not 
 serv heaven well , that you are so cross 'd . 
 falstaff . come up into my chamber . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 the garter inn 
 
 enter fenton and host 
 
 host . master fenton , talk not to me ; my mind is heavi ; i 
 will give over all . 
 fenton . yet hear me speak . assist me in my purpos , 
 and , as i am a gentleman , i 'll give the 
 a hundr pound in gold more than your loss . 
 host . i will hear you , master fenton ; and i will , at the least , 
 keep your counsel . 
 fenton . from time to time i have acquaint you 
 with the dear love i bear to fair ann page ; 
 who , mutual , hath answer 'd my affect , 
 so far forth as herself might be her chooser , 
 even to my wish . i have a letter from her 
 of such content as you will wonder at ; 
 the mirth whereof so lard with my matter 
 that neither , singli , can be manifest 
 without the show of both . fat falstaff 
 hath a great scene . the imag of the jest 
 i 'll show you here at larg . hark , good mine host : 
 to-night at heme 's oak , just 'twixt twelv and one , 
 must my sweet nan present the fairi queen- 
 the purpos whi is here-in which disguis , 
 while other jest are someth rank on foot , 
 her father hath command her to slip 
 away with slender , and with him at eton 
 immedi to marri ; she hath consent . 
 now , sir , 
 her mother , even strong against that match 
 and firm for doctor caiu , hath appoint 
 that he shall likewis shuffl her away 
 while other sport are task of their mind , 
 and at the dean'ri , where a priest attend , 
 straight marri her . to thi her mother 's plot 
 she seemingli obedi likewis hath 
 made promis to the doctor . now thu it rest : 
 her father mean she shall be all in white ; 
 and in that habit , when slender see hi time 
 to take her by the hand and bid her go , 
 she shall go with him ; her mother hath intend 
 the better to denot her to the doctor- 
 for they must all be mask 'd and vizarded- 
 that quaint in green she shall be loos enrob 'd , 
 with riband pendent , flare 'bout her head ; 
 and when the doctor spi hi vantag ripe , 
 to pinch her by the hand , and , on that token , 
 the maid hath given consent to go with him . 
 host . which mean she to deceiv , father or mother ? 
 fenton . both , my good host , to go along with me . 
 and here it rests-that you 'll procur the vicar 
 to stay for me at church , 'twixt twelv and one , 
 and in the law name of marri , 
 to give our heart unit ceremoni . 
 host . well , husband your devic ; i 'll to the vicar . 
 bring you the maid , you shall not lack a priest . 
 fenton . so shall i evermor be bound to thee ; 
 besid , i 'll make a present recompens . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene < num > . 
 
 the garter inn 
 
 enter falstaff and mistress quickli 
 
 falstaff . prithe , no more prattl ; go . i 'll , hold . thi is 
 the third time ; i hope good luck lie in odd number . 
 away , go ; they say there is divin in odd number , either 
 in nativ , chanc , or death . away . 
 quickli . i 'll provid you a chain , and i 'll do what i can to 
 get you a pair of horn . 
 falstaff . away , i say ; time wear ; hold up your head , and 
 minc . exit mrs. quickli 
 
 enter ford disguis 
 
 how now , master brook . master brook , the matter will 
 be known tonight or never . be you in the park about 
 midnight , at hern 's oak , and you shall see wonder . 
 ford . went you not to her yesterday , sir , as you told me 
 you had appoint ? 
 falstaff . i went to her , master brook , as you see , like a 
 poor old man ; but i came from her , master brook , like a 
 poor old woman . that same knave ford , her husband , hath 
 the finest mad devil of jealousi in him , master brook , that 
 ever govern 'd frenzi . i will tell you-h beat me grievous 
 in the shape of a woman ; for in the shape of man , master 
 brook , i fear not goliath with a weaver 's beam ; becaus 
 i know also life is a shuttl . i am in hast ; go along with 
 me ; i 'll . tell you all , master brook . sinc i pluck 'd gees , 
 play 'd truant , and whipp 'd top , i knew not what 't wa to 
 be beaten till late . follow me . i 'll tell you strang thing 
 of thi knave-ford , on whom to-night i will be reveng , 
 and i will deliv hi wife into your hand . follow . strang 
 thing in hand , master brook ! follow . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 windsor park 
 
 enter page , shallow , and slender 
 
 page . come , come ; we 'll couch i ' th ' castl ditch till we 
 see the light of our fairi . rememb , son slender , my daughter . 
 slender . ay , forsooth ; i have spoke with her , and we have 
 a nay-word how to know one anoth . i come to her in 
 white and cri 'mum ' ; she cri 'budget , ' and by that we 
 know one anoth . 
 shallow . that 's good too ; but what need either your mum 
 or her budget ? the white will deciph her well enough . 
 it hath struck ten o'clock . 
 page . the night is dark ; light and spirit will becom it well . 
 heaven prosper our sport ! no man mean evil but the 
 devil , and we shall know him by hi horn . let 's away ; 
 follow me . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 a street lead to the park 
 
 enter mistress page , mistress ford , and doctor caiu 
 
 mrs. page . master doctor , my daughter is in green ; when 
 you see your time , take her by the hand , away with her to 
 the deaneri , and dispatch it quickli . go befor into the 
 park ; we two must go togeth . 
 caiu . i know vat i have to do ; adieu . 
 mrs. page . fare you well , sir . [ exit caiu ] my husband 
 will not rejoic so much at the abus of falstaff as he will 
 chafe at the doctor 's marri my daughter ; but 't is no 
 matter ; better a littl chide than a great deal of 
 heartbreak . 
 mrs. ford . where is nan now , and her troop of fairi , and 
 the welsh devil , hugh ? 
 mrs. page . they are all couch 'd in a pit hard by heme 's 
 oak , with obscur 'd light ; which , at the veri instant of 
 falstaff 's and our meet , they will at onc display to the 
 night . 
 mrs. ford . that can not choos but amaz him . 
 mrs. page . if he be not amaz 'd , he will be mock 'd ; if he be 
 amaz 'd , he will everi way be mock 'd . 
 mrs. ford . we 'll betray him fine . 
 mrs. page . against such lewdster and their lecheri , 
 those that betray them do no treacheri . 
 mrs. ford . the hour draw on . to the oak , to the oak ! 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 windsor park 
 
 enter sir hugh evan like a satyr , with other as fairi 
 
 evan . trib , trib , fairi ; come ; and rememb your part . 
 be pold , i pray you ; follow me into the pit ; and when i 
 give the watch-ord , do as i pid you . come , come ; trib , 
 trib . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene < num > . 
 
 anoth part of the park 
 
 enter falstaff disguis as hern 
 
 falstaff . the windsor bell hath struck twelv ; the minut 
 draw on . now the hot-blood god assist me ! 
 rememb , jove , thou wast a bull for thi europa ; love set on thi 
 horn . o power love ! that in some respect make a 
 beast a man ; in some other a man a beast . you were also , 
 jupit , a swan , for the love of leda . o omnipot love ! 
 how near the god drew to the complexion of a goos ! a 
 fault done first in the form of a beast-o jove , a beastli 
 fault ! -and then anoth fault in the semblanc of a fowl- 
 think o n't , jove , a foul fault ! when god have hot back 
 what shall poor men do ? for me , i am here a windsor 
 stag ; and the fattest , i think , i ' th ' forest . send me a cool 
 rut-tim , jove , or who can blame me to piss my tallow ? 
 who come here ? my doe ? 
 
 enter mistress ford and mistress page 
 
 mrs. ford . sir john ! art thou there , my deer , my male deer . 
 falstaff . my doe with the black scut ! let the sky rain 
 potato ; let it thunder to the tune of greensleev , hail 
 kissing-comfit , and snow eringo ; let there come a tempest 
 of provoc , i will shelter me here . [ embrac her ] 
 mrs. ford . mistress page is come with me , sweetheart . 
 falstaff . divid me like a brib 'd buck , each a haunch ; i 
 will keep my side to myself , my shoulder for the fellow 
 of thi walk , and my horn i bequeath your husband . am 
 i a woodman , ha ? speak i like heme the hunter ? whi , 
 now is cupid a child of conscienc ; he make restitut . 
 as i am a true spirit , welcom ! [ a nois of horn ] 
 mrs. page . ala , what nois ? 
 mrs. ford . heaven forgiv our sin ! 
 falstaff . what should thi be ? 
 mrs. ford . } away , away . 
 mrs. page . } away , away . [ they run off ] 
 falstaff . i think the devil will not have me damn 'd , lest the 
 oil that 's in me should set hell on fire ; he would never els 
 cross me thu . 
 
 enter sir hugh evan like a satyr , ann page as 
 a fairi , and other as the fairi queen , fairi , and 
 hobgoblin ; all with taper 
 
 fairi queen . fairi , black , grey , green , and white , 
 you moonshin revel , and shade of night , 
 you orphan heir of fix destini , 
 attend your offic and your qualiti . 
 crier hobgoblin , make the fairi oye . 
 puck . elv , list your name ; silenc , you airi toy . 
 cricket , to windsor chimney shalt thou leap ; 
 where fire thou find'st unrak 'd , and hearth unswept , 
 there pinch the maid as blue as bilberri ; 
 our radiant queen hate slut and slutteri . 
 falstaff . they are fairi ; he that speak to them shall die . 
 i 'll wink and couch ; no man their work must eye . 
 [ lie down upon hi face ] 
 evan . where 's pede ? go you , and where you find a maid 
 that , ere she sleep , ha thrice her prayer said , 
 rais up the organ of her fantasi 
 sleep she as sound as careless infanc ; 
 but those as sleep and think not on their sin , 
 pinch them , arm , leg , back , shoulder , side , and shin . 
 fairi queen . about , about ; 
 search windsor castl , elv , within and out ; 
 strew good luck , ouph , on everi sacr room , 
 that it may stand till the perpetu doom 
 in state as wholesom as in state 't is fit , 
 worthi the owner and the owner it . 
 the sever chair of order look you scour 
 with juic of balm and everi preciou flower ; 
 each fair instal , coat , and sev'ral crest , 
 with loyal blazon , evermor be blest ! 
 and nightli , meadow-fairi , look you sing , 
 like to the garter 's compass , in a ring ; 
 th ' expressur that it bear , green let it be , 
 more fertile-fresh than all the field to see ; 
 and 'honi soit qui mal y pens ' write 
 in em'rald tuft , flow'r purpl , blue and white ; 
 like sapphir , pearl , and rich embroideri , 
 buckl below fair knighthood 's bend knee . 
 fairi use flow'r for their characteri . 
 away , dispers ; but till 't is one o'clock , 
 our danc of custom round about the oak 
 of hern the hunter let us not forget . 
 evan . pray you , lock hand in hand ; yourselv in order set ; 
 and twenti glow-worm shall our lantern be , 
 to guid our measur round about the tree . 
 but , stay . i smell a man of middl earth . 
 falstaff . heaven defend me from that welsh fairi , lest he 
 transform me to a piec of chees ! 
 puck . vile worm , thou wast o'erlook 'd even in thi birth . 
 fairi queen . with trial-fir touch me hi finger-end ; 
 if he be chast , the flame will back descend , 
 and turn him to no pain ; but if he start , 
 it is the flesh of a corrupt heart . 
 puck . a trial , come . 
 evan . come , will thi wood take fire ? 
 [ they put the taper to hi finger , and he start ] 
 falstaff . oh , oh , oh ! 
 fairi queen . corrupt , corrupt , and taint in desir ! 
 about him , fairi ; sing a scorn rhyme ; 
 and , as you trip , still pinch him to your time . 
 the song . 
 fie on sin fantasi ! 
 fie on lust and luxuri ! 
 lust is but a bloodi fire , 
 kindl with unchast desir , 
 fed in heart , whose flame aspir , 
 as thought do blow them , higher and higher . 
 pinch him , fairi , mutual ; 
 pinch him for hi villaini ; 
 pinch him and burn him and turn him about , 
 till candl and star-light and moonshin be out . 
 
 dure thi song they pinch falstaff . doctor 
 caiu come one way , and steal away a fairi in 
 green ; slender anoth way , and take off a fairi in 
 white ; and fenton steal away ann page . a nois 
 of hunt is heard within . all the fairi run away . 
 falstaff pull off hi buck 's head , and rise 
 
 enter page , ford , mistress page , mistress ford , and 
 sir hugh evan 
 
 page . nay , do not fli ; i think we have watch 'd you now . 
 will none but heme the hunter serv your turn ? 
 mrs. page . i pray you , come , hold up the jest no higher . 
 now , good sir john , how like you windsor wive ? 
 see you these , husband ? do not these fair yoke 
 becom the forest better than the town ? 
 ford . now , sir , who 's a cuckold now ? master brook , 
 falstaff 's a knave , a cuckoldli knave ; here are hi horn , 
 master brook ; and , master brook , he hath enjoy noth of 
 ford 's but hi buck-basket , hi cudgel , and twenti pound 
 of money , which must be paid to master brook ; hi hors 
 are arrest for it , master brook . 
 mrs. ford . sir john , we have had ill luck ; we could never 
 meet . i will never take you for my love again ; but i will 
 alway count you my deer . 
 falstaff . i do begin to perceiv that i am made an ass . 
 ford . ay , and an ox too ; both the proof are extant . 
 falstaff . and these are not fairi ? i wa three or four 
 time in the thought they were not fairi ; and yet the 
 guilti of my mind , the sudden surpris of my power , 
 drove the gross of the fopperi into a receiv 'd belief , 
 in despit of the teeth of all rhyme and reason , that they 
 were fairi . see now how wit may be made a jack-a-l 
 when 't is upon ill employ . 
 evan . sir john falstaff , serv got , and leav your desir , 
 and fairi will not pins you . 
 ford . well said , fairi hugh . 
 evan . and leav you your jealousi too , i pray you . 
 ford . i will never mistrust my wife again , till thou art abl 
 to woo her in good english . 
 falstaff . have i laid my brain in the sun , and dri it , that 
 it want matter to prevent so gross , o'er-reach as thi ? 
 am i ridden with a welsh goat too ? shall i have a cox-comb 
 of friez ? 't is time i were chok 'd with a piec of 
 toast chees . 
 evan . sees is not good to give putter ; your belli is all 
 putter . 
 falstaff . 'sees ' and 'putter ' ! have i liv 'd to stand at the 
 taunt of one that make fritter of english ? thi is enough 
 to be the decay of lust and late-walk through the realm . 
 mrs. page . whi , sir john , do you think , though we would 
 have thrust virtu out of our heart by the head and 
 shoulder , and have given ourselv without scrupl to hell , 
 that ever the devil could have made you our delight ? 
 ford . what , a hodge-pud ? a bag of flax ? 
 mrs. page . a puff 'd man ? 
 page . old , cold , wither 'd , and of intoler entrail ? 
 ford . and one that is as slander as satan ? 
 page . and as poor as job ? 
 ford . and as wick as hi wife ? 
 evan . and given to fornic , and to tavern , and sack , 
 and wine , and metheglin , and to drink , and swear , 
 and stare , pribbl and prabbl ? 
 falstaff . well , i am your theme ; you have the start of me ; 
 i am deject ; i am not abl to answer the welsh flannel ; 
 ignor itself is a plummet o'er me ; use me as you will . 
 ford . marri , sir , we 'll bring you to windsor , to one master 
 brook , that you have cozen 'd of money , to whom you 
 should have been a pander . over and abov that you have 
 suffer 'd , i think to repay that money will be a bite 
 afflict . 
 page . yet be cheer , knight ; thou shalt eat a posset 
 tonight at my hous , where i will desir thee to laugh at my 
 wife , that now laugh at thee . tell her master slender hath 
 marri her daughter . 
 mrs. page . [ asid ] doctor doubt that ; if ann page be 
 my daughter , she is , by thi , doctor caiu ' wife . 
 
 enter slender 
 
 slender . whoa , ho , ho , father page ! 
 page . son , how now ! how now , son ! have you dispatch 'd ' ? 
 slender . dispatch 'd ! i 'll make the best in gloucestershir 
 know o n't ; would i were hang 'd , la , els ! 
 page . of what , son ? 
 slender . i came yonder at eton to marri mistress ann 
 page , and she 's a great lubberli boy . if it had not been i ' 
 th ' church , i would have swing 'd him , or he should have 
 swing 'd me . if i did not think it had been ann page , 
 would i might never stir ! -and 't is a postmast 's boy . 
 page . upon my life , then , you took the wrong . 
 slender . what need you tell me that ? i think so , when i 
 took a boy for a girl . if i had been marri to him , for all 
 he wa in woman 's apparel , i would not have had him . 
 page . whi , thi is your own folli . did not i tell you how 
 you should know my daughter by her garment ? 
 slender . i went to her in white and cri 'mum ' and she 
 cri 'budget ' as ann and i had appoint ; and yet it wa 
 not ann , but a postmast 's boy . 
 mrs. page . good georg , be not angri . i knew of your 
 purpos ; turn 'd my daughter into green ; and , inde , she 
 is now with the doctor at the dean'ri , and there marri . 
 
 enter caiu 
 
 caiu . vere is mistress page ? by gar , i am cozen ; i ha ' 
 marri un garcon , a boy ; un paysan , by gar , a boy ; it is 
 not ann page ; by gar , i am cozen . 
 mrs. page . whi , did you take her in green ? 
 caiu . ay , be gar , and 't is a boy ; be gar , i 'll rais all 
 windsor . exit caiu 
 ford . thi is strang . who hath got the right ann ? 
 page . my heart misgiv me ; here come master fenton . 
 
 enter fenton and ann page 
 
 how now , master fenton ! 
 ann . pardon , good father . good my mother , pardon . 
 page . now , mistress , how chanc you went not with master 
 slender ? 
 mrs. page . whi went you not with master doctor , maid ? 
 fenton . you do amaz her . hear the truth of it . 
 you would have marri her most shame , 
 where there wa no proport held in love . 
 the truth is , she and i , long sinc contract , 
 are now so sure that noth can dissolv us . 
 th ' offenc is holi that she hath commit ; 
 and thi deceit lose the name of craft , 
 of disobedi , or undut titl , 
 sinc therein she doth evit and shun 
 a thousand irreligi curs hour , 
 which forc marriag would have brought upon her . 
 ford . stand not amaz 'd ; here is no remedi . 
 in love , the heaven themselv do guid the state ; 
 money buy land , and wive are sold by fate . 
 falstaff . i am glad , though you have ta'en a special stand 
 to strike at me , that your arrow hath glanc 'd . 
 page . well , what remedi ? fenton , heaven give thee joy ! 
 what can not be eschew 'd must be embrac 'd . 
 falstaff . when night-dog run , all sort of deer are cha 'd . 
 mrs. page . well , i will muse no further . master fenton , 
 heaven give you mani , mani merri day ! 
 good husband , let us everi one go home , 
 and laugh thi sport o'er by a countri fire ; 
 sir john and all . 
 ford . let it be so . sir john , 
 to master brook you yet shall hold your word ; 
 for he , to-night , shall lie with mistress ford . exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 a midsumm night 's dream 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 king henri the sixth 
 humphrey , duke of gloucest , hi uncl 
 cardin beaufort , bishop of winchest , great-uncl to the king 
 richard plantagenet , duke of york 
 edward and richard , hi son 
 duke of somerset 
 duke of suffolk 
 duke of buckingham 
 lord clifford 
 young clifford , hi son 
 earl of salisburi 
 earl of warwick 
 lord scale 
 lord say 
 sir humphrey stafford 
 william stafford , hi brother 
 sir john stanley 
 vaux 
 matthew goff 
 a lieuten , a shipmast , a master 's mate , and walter whitmor 
 two gentlemen , prison with suffolk 
 john hume and john southwel , two priest 
 roger bolingbrok , a conjur 
 a spirit rais by him 
 thoma horner , an armour 
 peter , hi man 
 clerk of chatham 
 mayor of saint alban 
 saunder simpcox , an impostor 
 alexand iden , a kentish gentleman 
 jack cade , a rebel 
 georg bevi , john holland , dick the butcher , smith the weaver , 
 michael , & c. , follow of cade 
 two murder 
 
 margaret , queen to king henri 
 eleanor , duchess of gloucest 
 margeri jourdain , a witch 
 wife to simpcox 
 
 lord , ladi , and attend ; petition , aldermen , a herald , 
 a beadl , a sheriff , offic , citizen , prentic , falcon , 
 guard , soldier , messeng , & c. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 england 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 london . the palac 
 
 flourish of trumpet ; then hautboy . enter the king , duke humphrey 
 of gloucest , salisburi , warwick , and cardin beaufort , on the one side ; 
 the queen , suffolk , york , somerset , and buckingham , on the other 
 
 suffolk . as by your high imperi majesti 
 i had in charg at my depart for franc , 
 as procur to your excel , 
 to marri princess margaret for your grace ; 
 so , in the famou ancient citi tour , 
 in presenc of the king of franc and sicil , 
 the duke of orlean , calab , bretagn , and alencon , 
 seven earl , twelv baron , and twenti reverend bishop , 
 i have perform 'd my task , and wa espou 'd ; 
 and humbl now upon my bend knee , 
 in sight of england and her lordli peer , 
 deliv up my titl in the queen 
 to your most graciou hand , that are the substanc 
 of that great shadow i did repres : 
 the happiest gift that ever marqui gave , 
 the fairest queen that ever king receiv 'd . 
 king henri . suffolk , aris . welcom , queen margaret : 
 i can express no kinder sign of love 
 than thi kind kiss . o lord , that lend me life , 
 lend me a heart replet with thank ! 
 for thou hast given me in thi beauteou face 
 a world of earthli bless to my soul , 
 if sympathi of love unit our thought . 
 queen . great king of england , and my graciou lord , 
 the mutual confer that my mind hath had , 
 by day , by night , wake and in my dream , 
 in courtli compani or at my bead , 
 with you , mine alder-liefest sovereign , 
 make me the bolder to salut my king 
 with ruder term , such as my wit afford 
 and over-joy of heart doth minist . 
 king henri . her sight did ravish , but her grace in speech , 
 her word y-clad with wisdom 's majesti , 
 make me from wond'r fall to weep joy , 
 such is the ful of my heart 's content . 
 lord , with one cheer voic welcom my love . 
 all . [ kneel ] long live queen margaret , england 's happi ! 
 queen . we thank you all . [ flourish ] 
 suffolk . my lord protector , so it pleas your grace , 
 here are the articl of contract peac 
 between our sovereign and the french king charl , 
 for eighteen month conclud by consent . 
 gloucest . [ read ] 'imprimi : it is agre between the french king 
 charl and william de la pole , marquess of suffolk , ambassador 
 for henri king of england , that the said henri shall espous the 
 ladi margaret , daughter unto reignier king of napl , sicilia , 
 and jerusalem , and crown her queen of england ere the thirtieth 
 of may next ensu . 
 item : that the duchi of anjou and the counti of main shall be 
 releas and deliv to the king her father'- 
 [ let the paper fall ] 
 king henri . uncl , how now ! 
 gloucest . pardon me , graciou lord ; 
 some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart , 
 and dimm 'd mine eye , that i can read no further . 
 king henri . uncl of winchest , i pray read on . 
 cardin . [ read ] 'item : it is further agre between them that the 
 duchi of anjou and main shall be releas and deliv over 
 to the king her father , and she sent over of the king of 
 england 's own proper cost and charg , without have ani dowri . ' 
 king henri . they pleas us well . lord marquess , kneel down . 
 we here creat thee the first duke of suffolk , 
 and girt thee with the sword . cousin of york , 
 we here discharg your grace from be regent 
 i ' th ' part of franc , till term of eighteen month 
 be full expir 'd . thank , uncl winchest , 
 gloucest , york , buckingham , somerset , 
 salisburi , and warwick ; 
 we thank you all for thi great favour done 
 in entertain to my princ queen . 
 come , let us in , and with all speed provid 
 to see her coron be perform 'd . 
 exeunt king , queen , and suffolk 
 gloucest . brave peer of england , pillar of the state , 
 to you duke humphrey must unload hi grief 
 your grief , the common grief of all the land . 
 what ! did my brother henri spend hi youth , 
 hi valour , coin , and peopl , in the war ? 
 did he so often lodg in open field , 
 in winter 's cold and summer 's parch heat , 
 to conquer franc , hi true inherit ? 
 and did my brother bedford toil hi wit 
 to keep by polici what henri got ? 
 have you yourselv , somerset , buckingham , 
 brave york , salisburi , and victori warwick , 
 receiv 'd deep scar in franc and normandi ? 
 or hath mine uncl beaufort and myself , 
 with all the learn council of the realm , 
 studi so long , sat in the council hous 
 earli and late , debat to and fro 
 how franc and frenchmen might be kept in awe ? 
 and had hi high in hi infanc 
 crown in pari , in despit of foe ? 
 and shall these labour and these honour die ? 
 shall henri 's conquest , bedford 's vigil , 
 your deed of war , and all our counsel die ? 
 o peer of england , shame is thi leagu ! 
 fatal thi marriag , cancel your fame , 
 blot your name from book of memori , 
 raze the charact of your renown , 
 defac monument of conquer 'd franc , 
 undo all , as all had never been ! 
 cardin . nephew , what mean thi passion discours , 
 thi peror with such circumst ? 
 for franc , 't is our ; and we will keep it still . 
 gloucest . ay , uncl , we will keep it if we can ; 
 but now it is imposs we should . 
 suffolk , the new-mad duke that rule the roast , 
 hath given the duchi of anjou and main 
 unto the poor king reignier , whose larg style 
 agre not with the lean of hi purs . 
 salisburi . now , by the death of him that die for all , 
 these counti were the key of normandi ! 
 but wherefor weep warwick , my valiant son ? 
 warwick . for grief that they are past recoveri ; 
 for were there hope to conquer them again 
 my sword should shed hot blood , mine eye no tear . 
 anjou and main ! myself did win them both ; 
 those provinc these arm of mine did conquer ; 
 and are the citi that i got with wound 
 deliv 'd up again with peac word ? 
 mort dieu ! 
 york . for suffolk 's duke , may he be suffoc , 
 that dim the honour of thi warlik isl ! 
 franc should have torn and rent my veri heart 
 befor i would have yield to thi leagu . 
 i never read but england 's king have had 
 larg sum of gold and dowri with their wive ; 
 and our king henri give away hi own 
 to match with her that bring no vantag . 
 gloucest . a proper jest , and never heard befor , 
 that suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth 
 for cost and charg in transport her ! 
 she should have stay 'd in franc , and starv 'd in franc , 
 before- 
 cardin . my lord of gloucest , now ye grow too hot : 
 it wa the pleasur of my lord the king . 
 gloucest . my lord of winchest , i know your mind ; 
 't is not my speech that you do mislik , 
 but 't is my presenc that doth troubl ye . 
 rancour will out : proud prelat , in thi face 
 i see thi furi ; if i longer stay 
 we shall begin our ancient bicker . 
 lord , farewel ; and say , when i am gone , 
 i prophesi franc will be lost ere long . exit 
 cardin . so , there goe our protector in a rage . 
 't is known to you he is mine enemi ; 
 nay , more , an enemi unto you all , 
 and no great friend , i fear me , to the king . 
 consid , lord , he is the next of blood 
 and heir appar to the english crown . 
 had henri got an empir by hi marriag 
 and all the wealthi kingdom of the west , 
 there 's reason he should be displea 'd at it . 
 look to it , lord ; let not hi smooth word 
 bewitch your heart ; be wise and circumspect . 
 what though the common peopl favour him , 
 call him 'humphrey , the good duke of gloucest , ' 
 clap their hand , and cri with loud voic 
 'jesu maintain your royal excel ! ' 
 with 'god preserv the good duke humphrey ! ' 
 i fear me , lord , for all thi flatter gloss , 
 he will be found a danger protector . 
 buckingham . whi should he then protect our sovereign , 
 he be of age to govern of himself ? 
 cousin of somerset , join you with me , 
 and all togeth , with the duke of suffolk , 
 we 'll quickli hois duke humphrey from hi seat . 
 cardin . thi weighti busi will not brook delay ; 
 i 'll to the duke of suffolk present . exit 
 somerset . cousin of buckingham , though humphrey 's pride 
 and great of hi place be grief to us , 
 yet let us watch the haughti cardin ; 
 hi insol is more intoler 
 than all the princ in the land besid ; 
 if gloucest be displac 'd , he 'll be protector . 
 buckingham . or thou or i , somerset , will be protector , 
 despit duke humphrey or the cardin . 
 exeunt buckingham and somerset 
 salisburi . pride went befor , ambit follow him . 
 while these do labour for their own prefer , 
 behov it us to labour for the realm . 
 i never saw but humphrey duke of gloucest 
 did bear him like a nobl gentleman . 
 oft have i seen the haughti cardinal- 
 more like a soldier than a man o ' th ' church , 
 as stout and proud as he were lord of all- 
 swear like a ruffian and demean himself 
 unlik the ruler of a commonw . 
 warwick my son , the comfort of my age , 
 thi deed , thi plain , and thi housekeep , 
 hath won the greatest favour of the common , 
 except none but good duke humphrey . 
 and , brother york , thi act in ireland , 
 in bring them to civil disciplin , 
 thi late exploit done in the heart of franc 
 when thou wert regent for our sovereign , 
 have made thee fear 'd and honour 'd of the peopl : 
 join we togeth for the public good , 
 in what we can , to bridl and suppress 
 the pride of suffolk and the cardin , 
 with somerset 's and buckingham 's ambit ; 
 and , as we may , cherish duke humphrey 's deed 
 while they do tend the profit of the land . 
 warwick . so god help warwick , as he love the land 
 and common profit of hi countri ! 
 york . and so say york- [ asid ] for he hath greatest caus . 
 salisburi . then let 's make hast away and look unto the main . 
 warwick . unto the main ! o father , main is lost- 
 that main which by main forc warwick did win , 
 and would have kept so long as breath did last . 
 main chanc , father , you meant ; but i meant main , 
 which i will win from franc , or els be slain . 
 exeunt warwick and salisburi 
 york . anjou and main are given to the french ; 
 pari is lost ; the state of normandi 
 stand on a tickl point now they are gone . 
 suffolk conclud on the articl ; 
 the peer agre ; and henri wa well plea 'd 
 to chang two dukedom for a duke 's fair daughter . 
 i can not blame them all : what is't to them ? 
 't is thine they give away , and not their own . 
 pirat may make cheap pennyworth of their pillag , 
 and purchas friend , and give to courtezan , 
 still revel like lord till all be gone ; 
 while as the silli owner of the good 
 weep over them and wring hi hapless hand 
 and shake hi head and trembl stand aloof , 
 while all is shar 'd and all is born away , 
 readi to starv and dare not touch hi own . 
 so york must sit and fret and bite hi tongu , 
 while hi own land are bargain 'd for and sold . 
 methink the realm of england , franc , and ireland , 
 bear that proport to my flesh and blood 
 as did the fatal brand althaea burnt 
 unto the princ 's heart of calydon . 
 anjou and main both given unto the french ! 
 cold news for me , for i had hope of franc , 
 even as i have of fertil england 's soil . 
 a day will come when york shall claim hi own ; 
 and therefor i will take the nevil ' part , 
 and make a show of love to proud duke humphrey , 
 and when i spi advantag , claim the crown , 
 for that 's the golden mark i seek to hit . 
 nor shall proud lancast usurp my right , 
 nor hold the sceptr in hi childish fist , 
 nor wear the diadem upon hi head , 
 whose church-lik humour fit not for a crown . 
 then , york , be still awhil , till time do serv ; 
 watch thou and wake , when other be asleep , 
 to pri into the secret of the state ; 
 till henri , surfeit in joy of love 
 with hi new bride and england 's dear-bought queen , 
 and humphrey with the peer be fall'n at jar ; 
 then will i rais aloft the milk-whit rose , 
 with whose sweet smell the air shall be perfum 'd , 
 and in my standard bear the arm of york , 
 to grappl with the hous of lancast ; 
 and forc perforc i 'll make him yield the crown , 
 whose bookish rule hath pull 'd fair england down . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 the duke of gloucest 's hous 
 
 enter duke and hi wife eleanor 
 
 duchess . whi droop my lord , like over-ripen 'd corn 
 hang the head at cere ' plenteou load ? 
 whi doth the great duke humphrey knit hi brow , 
 as frown at the favour of the world ? 
 whi are thine eye fix 'd to the sullen earth , 
 gaze on that which seem to dim thi sight ? 
 what see'st thou there ? king henri 's diadem , 
 encha 'd with all the honour of the world ? 
 if so , gaze on , and grovel on thi face 
 until thi head be circl with the same . 
 put forth thi hand , reach at the gloriou gold . 
 what , is't too short ? i 'll lengthen it with mine ; 
 and have both togeth heav 'd it up , 
 we 'll both togeth lift our head to heaven , 
 and never more abas our sight so low 
 as to vouchsaf one glanc unto the ground . 
 gloucest . o nell , sweet nell , if thou dost love thi lord , 
 banish the canker of ambiti thought ! 
 and may that thought , when i imagin ill 
 against my king and nephew , virtuou henri , 
 be my last breath in thi mortal world ! 
 my troublou dream thi night doth make me sad . 
 duchess . what dream 'd my lord ? tell me , and i 'll requit it 
 with sweet rehears of my morn 's dream . 
 gloucest . methought thi staff , mine office-badg in court , 
 wa broke in twain ; by whom i have forgot , 
 but , as i think , it wa by th ' cardin ; 
 and on the piec of the broken wand 
 were plac 'd the head of edmund duke of somerset 
 and william de la pole , first duke of suffolk . 
 thi wa my dream ; what it doth bode god know . 
 duchess . tut , thi wa noth but an argument 
 that he that break a stick of gloucest 's grove 
 shall lose hi head for hi presumpt . 
 but list to me , my humphrey , my sweet duke : 
 methought i sat in seat of majesti 
 in the cathedr church of westminst , 
 and in that chair where king and queen were crown 'd ; 
 where henri and dame margaret kneel 'd to me , 
 and on my head did set the diadem . 
 gloucest . nay , eleanor , then must i chide outright . 
 presumptu dame , ill-nurtur 'd eleanor ! 
 art thou not second woman in the realm , 
 and the protector 's wife , belov 'd of him ? 
 hast thou not worldli pleasur at command 
 abov the reach or compass of thi thought ? 
 and wilt thou still be hammer treacheri 
 to tumbl down thi husband and thyself 
 from top of honour to disgrac 's feet ? 
 away from me , and let me hear no more ! 
 duchess . what , what , my lord ! are you so choler 
 with eleanor for tell but her dream ? 
 next time i 'll keep my dream unto myself 
 and not be check 'd . 
 gloucest . nay , be not angri ; i am plea 'd again . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . my lord protector , 't is hi high ' pleasur 
 you do prepar to ride unto saint alban , 
 where as the king and queen do mean to hawk . 
 gloucest . i go . come , nell , thou wilt ride with us ? 
 duchess . ye , my good lord , i 'll follow present . 
 exeunt gloucest and messeng 
 follow i must ; i can not go befor , 
 while gloucest bear thi base and humbl mind . 
 were i a man , a duke , and next of blood , 
 i would remov these tediou stumbling-block 
 and smooth my way upon their headless neck ; 
 and , be a woman , i will not be slack 
 to play my part in fortun 's pageant . 
 where are you there , sir john ? nay , fear not , man , 
 we are alon ; here 's none but thee and i . 
 
 enter hume 
 
 hume . jesu preserv your royal majesti ! 
 duchess . what say'st thou ? majesti ! i am but grace . 
 hume . but , by the grace of god and hume 's advic , 
 your grace 's titl shall be multipli . 
 duchess . what say'st thou , man ? hast thou as yet conferr 'd 
 with margeri jourdain , the cun witch of eie , 
 with roger bolingbrok , the conjur ? 
 and will they undertak to do me good ? 
 hume . thi they have promis , to show your high 
 a spirit rai 'd from depth of underground 
 that shall make answer to such question 
 as by your grace shall be propound him 
 duchess . it is enough ; i 'll think upon the question ; 
 when from saint alban we do make return 
 we 'll see these thing effect to the full . 
 here , hume , take thi reward ; make merri , man , 
 with thi confeder in thi weighti caus . exit 
 hume . hume must make merri with the duchess ' gold ; 
 marri , and shall . but , how now , sir john hume ! 
 seal up your lip and give no word but mum : 
 the busi asketh silent secreci . 
 dame eleanor give gold to bring the witch : 
 gold can not come amiss were she a devil . 
 yet have i gold fli from anoth coast- 
 i dare not say from the rich cardin , 
 and from the great and new-mad duke of suffolk ; 
 yet i do find it so ; for , to be plain , 
 they , know dame eleanor 's aspir humour , 
 have hire me to undermin the duchess , 
 and buzz these conjur in her brain . 
 they say ' a crafti knave doe need no broker ' ; 
 yet am i suffolk and the cardin 's broker . 
 hume , if you take not heed , you shall go near 
 to call them both a pair of crafti knave . 
 well , so it stand ; and thu , i fear , at last 
 hume 's knaveri will be the duchess ' wreck , 
 and her attaintur will be humphrey 's fall 
 sort how it will , i shall have gold for all . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter three or four petition , peter , the armour 's man , be one 
 
 first petition . my master , let 's stand close ; my lord protector 
 will come thi way by and by , and then we may deliv our 
 supplic in the quill . 
 second petition . marri , the lord protect him , for he 's a good 
 man , jesu bless him ! 
 
 enter suffolk and queen 
 
 first petition . here ' a come , methink , and the queen with him . 
 i 'll be the first , sure . 
 second petition . come back , fool ; thi is the duke of suffolk and 
 not my lord protector . 
 suffolk . how now , fellow ! wouldst anyth with me ? 
 first petition . i pray , my lord , pardon me ; i took ye for my lord 
 protector . 
 queen . [ read ] 'to my lord protector ! ' are your supplic to 
 hi lordship ? let me see them . what is thine ? 
 first petition . mine is , a n't pleas your grace , against john 
 goodman , my lord cardin 's man , for keep my hous and land , 
 and wife and all , from me . 
 suffolk . thi wife too ! that 's some wrong inde . what 's your ? 
 what 's here ! [ read ] 'against the duke of suffolk , for enclos 
 the common of melford . ' how now , sir knave ! 
 second petition . ala , sir , i am but a poor petition of our 
 whole township . 
 peter . [ present hi petit ] against my master , thoma horner , 
 for say that the duke of york wa right heir to the crown . 
 queen . what say'st thou ? did the duke of york say he wa right 
 heir to the crown ? 
 peter . that my master wa ? no , forsooth . my master said that he 
 wa , and that the king wa an usurp . 
 suffolk . who is there ? [ enter servant ] take thi fellow in , and 
 send for hi master with a pursuiv present . we 'll hear more 
 of your matter befor the king . 
 exit servant with peter 
 queen . and as for you , that love to be protect 
 under the wing of our protector 's grace , 
 begin your suit anew , and sue to him . 
 [ tear the supplic ] 
 away , base cullion ! suffolk , let them go . 
 all . come , let 's be gone . exeunt 
 queen . my lord of suffolk , say , is thi the guis , 
 is thi the fashion in the court of england ? 
 is thi the govern of britain 's isl , 
 and thi the royalti of albion 's king ? 
 what , shall king henri be a pupil still , 
 under the surli gloucest 's govern ? 
 am i a queen in titl and in style , 
 and must be made a subject to a duke ? 
 i tell thee , pole , when in the citi tour 
 thou ran'st a tilt in honour of my love 
 and stol'st away the ladi ' heart of franc , 
 i thought king henri had resembl thee 
 in courag , courtship , and proport ; 
 but all hi mind is bent to holi , 
 to number ave-mari on hi bead ; 
 hi champion are the prophet and apostl ; 
 hi weapon , holi saw of sacr writ ; 
 hi studi is hi tilt-yard , and hi love 
 are brazen imag of canon saint . 
 i would the colleg of the cardin 
 would choos him pope , and carri him to rome , 
 and set the tripl crown upon hi head ; 
 that were a state fit for hi holi . 
 suffolk . madam , be patient . as i wa caus 
 your high came to england , so will i 
 in england work your grace 's full content . 
 queen . besid the haughti protector , have we beaufort 
 the imperi churchman ; somerset , buckingham , 
 and grumbl york ; and not the least of these 
 but can do more in england than the king . 
 suffolk . and he of these that can do most of all 
 can not do more in england than the nevil ; 
 salisburi and warwick are no simpl peer . 
 queen . not all these lord do vex me half so much 
 as that proud dame , the lord protector 's wife . 
 she sweep it through the court with troop of ladi , 
 more like an empress than duke humphrey 's wife . 
 stranger in court do take her for the queen . 
 she bear a duke 's revenu on her back , 
 and in her heart she scorn our poverti ; 
 shall i not live to be aveng 'd on her ? 
 contemptu base-born callet as she is , 
 she vaunt 'mongst her minion t ' other day 
 the veri train of her worst wear gown 
 wa better worth than all my father 's land , 
 till suffolk gave two dukedom for hi daughter . 
 suffolk . madam , myself have lim 'd a bush for her , 
 and plac 'd a quir of such entic bird 
 that she will light to listen to the lay , 
 and never mount to troubl you again . 
 so , let her rest . and , madam , list to me , 
 for i am bold to counsel you in thi : 
 although we fanci not the cardin , 
 yet must we join with him and with the lord , 
 till we have brought duke humphrey in disgrac . 
 as for the duke of york , thi late complaint 
 will make but littl for hi benefit . 
 so one by one we 'll weed them all at last , 
 and you yourself shall steer the happi helm . 
 
 sound a sennet . enter the king , duke humphrey , 
 cardin beaufort , buckingham , york , somerset , salisburi , 
 warwick , and the duchess of gloucest 
 
 king henri . for my part , nobl lord , i care not which : 
 or somerset or york , all 's one to me . 
 york . if york have ill demean 'd himself in franc , 
 then let him be denay 'd the regentship . 
 somerset . if somerset be unworthi of the place , 
 let york be regent ; i will yield to him . 
 warwick . whether your grace be worthi , yea or no , 
 disput not that ; york is the worthier . 
 cardin . ambiti warwick , let thi better speak . 
 warwick . the cardin 's not my better in the field . 
 buckingham . all in thi presenc are thi better , warwick . 
 warwick . warwick may live to be the best of all . 
 salisburi . peac , son ! and show some reason , buckingham , 
 whi somerset should be preferr 'd in thi . 
 queen . becaus the king , forsooth , will have it so . 
 gloucest . madam , the king is old enough himself 
 to give hi censur . these are no women 's matter . 
 queen . if he be old enough , what need your grace 
 to be protector of hi excel ? 
 gloucest . madam , i am protector of the realm ; 
 and at hi pleasur will resign my place . 
 suffolk . resign it then , and leav thine insol . 
 sinc thou wert king- as who is king but thou ? - 
 the commonwealth hath daili run to wrack , 
 the dauphin hath prevail 'd beyond the sea , 
 and all the peer and nobl of the realm 
 have been as bondmen to thi sovereignti . 
 cardin . the common hast thou rack 'd ; the clergi 's bag 
 are lank and lean with thi extort . 
 somerset . thi sumptuou build and thi wife 's attir 
 have cost a mass of public treasuri . 
 buckingham . thi cruelti in execut 
 upon offend hath exceed law , 
 and left thee to the merci of the law . 
 queen . thi sale of offic and town in franc , 
 if they were known , as the suspect is great , 
 would make thee quickli hop without thi head . 
 exit gloucest . the queen drop queen her fan 
 give me my fan . what , minion , can ye not ? 
 [ she give the duchess a box on the ear ] 
 i cri your merci , madam ; wa it you ? 
 duchess . was't i ? yea , i it wa , proud frenchwoman . 
 could i come near your beauti with my nail , 
 i could set my ten command in your face . 
 king henri . sweet aunt , be quiet ; 't wa against her will . 
 duchess . against her will , good king ? look to 't in time ; 
 she 'll hamper thee and dandl thee like a babi . 
 though in thi place most master wear no breech , 
 she shall not strike dame eleanor unreveng 'd . exit 
 buckingham . lord cardin , i will follow eleanor , 
 and listen after humphrey , how he proce . 
 she 's tickl now ; her fume need no spur , 
 she 'll gallop far enough to her destruct . exit 
 
 re-ent gloucest 
 
 gloucest . now , lord , my choler be overblown 
 with walk onc about the quadrangl , 
 i come to talk of commonwealth affair . 
 as for your spite fals object , 
 prove them , and i lie open to the law ; 
 but god in merci so deal with my soul 
 as i in duti love my king and countri ! 
 but to the matter that we have in hand : 
 i say , my sovereign , york is meetest man 
 to be your regent in the realm of franc . 
 suffolk . befor we make elect , give me leav 
 to show some reason , of no littl forc , 
 that york is most unmeet of ani man . 
 york . i 'll tell thee , suffolk , whi i am unmeet : 
 first , for i can not flatter thee in pride ; 
 next , if i be appoint for the place , 
 my lord of somerset will keep me here 
 without discharg , money , or furnitur , 
 till franc be won into the dauphin 's hand . 
 last time i danc 'd attend on hi will 
 till pari wa besieg 'd , famish 'd , and lost . 
 warwick . that can i wit ; and a fouler fact 
 did never traitor in the land commit . 
 suffolk . peac , headstrong warwick ! 
 warwick . imag of pride , whi should i hold my peac ? 
 
 enter horner , the armour , and hi man peter , guard 
 
 suffolk . becaus here is a man accu 'd of treason : 
 pray god the duke of york excus himself ! 
 york . doth ani one accus york for a traitor ? 
 king henri . what mean'st thou , suffolk ? tell me , what are these ? 
 suffolk . pleas it your majesti , thi is the man 
 that doth accus hi master of high treason ; 
 hi word were these : that richard duke of york 
 wa right heir unto the english crown , 
 and that your majesti wa an usurp . 
 king henri . say , man , were these thi word ? 
 horner . a n't shall pleas your majesti , i never said nor thought 
 ani such matter . god is my wit , i am fals accu 'd by the 
 villain . 
 peter . [ hold up hi hand ] by these ten bone , my lord , he did 
 speak them to me in the garret one night , as we were scour my 
 lord of york 's armour . 
 york . base dunghil villain and mechan , 
 i 'll have thi head for thi thi traitor 's speech . 
 i do beseech your royal majesti , 
 let him have all the rigour of the law . 
 horner ` . ala , my lord , hang me if ever i spake the word . my 
 accus is my prentic ; and when i did correct him for hi fault 
 the other day , he did vow upon hi knee he would be even with 
 me . i have good wit of thi ; therefor i beseech your 
 majesti , do not cast away an honest man for a villain 's 
 accus . 
 king henri . uncl , what shall we say to thi in law ? 
 gloucest . thi doom , my lord , if i may judg : 
 let somerset be regent o'er the french , 
 becaus in york thi breed suspicion ; 
 and let these have a day appoint them 
 for singl combat in conveni place , 
 for he hath wit of hi servant 's malic . 
 thi is the law , and thi duke humphrey 's doom . 
 somerset . i humbl thank your royal majesti . 
 horner . and i accept the combat willingli . 
 peter . ala , my lord , i can not fight ; for god 's sake , piti my case ! 
 the spite of man prevaileth against me . o lord , have merci upon 
 me , i shall never be abl to fight a blow ! o lord , my heart ! 
 gloucest . sirrah , or you must fight or els be hang 'd . 
 king henri . away with them to prison ; and the day of combat shall 
 be the last of the next month . 
 come , somerset , we 'll see thee sent away . flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 london . the duke of gloucest 's garden 
 
 enter margeri jourdain , the witch ; the two priest , hume and southwel ; 
 and bolingbrok 
 
 hume . come , my master ; the duchess , i tell you , expect 
 perform of your promis . 
 bolingbrok . master hume , we are therefor provid ; will her 
 ladyship behold and hear our exorc ? 
 hume . ay , what els ? fear you not her courag . 
 bolingbrok . i have heard her report to be a woman of an 
 invinc spirit ; but it shall be conveni , master hume , that 
 you be by her aloft while we be busi below ; and so i pray you go , 
 in god 's name , and leav us . [ exit hume ] mother jourdain , be you 
 prostrat and grovel on the earth ; john southwel , read you ; and 
 let us to our work . 
 
 enter duchess aloft , follow by hume 
 
 duchess . well said , my master ; and welcom all . to thi gear , the 
 sooner the better . 
 bolingbrok . patienc , good ladi ; wizard know their time : 
 deep night , dark night , the silent of the night , 
 the time of night when troy wa set on fire ; 
 the time when screech-owl cri and ban-dog howl , 
 and spirit walk and ghost break up their graves- 
 that time best fit the work we have in hand . 
 madam , sit you , and fear not : whom we rais 
 we will make fast within a hallow 'd verg . 
 
 [ here they do the ceremoni belong , and make the circl ; 
 bolingbrok or southwel read : 'conjuro te , ' & c. 
 it thunder and lighten terribl ; then the spirit riseth ] 
 
 spirit . adsum . 
 margeri jourdain . asmath , 
 by the etern god , whose name and power 
 thou tremblest at , answer that i shall ask ; 
 for till thou speak thou shalt not pass from henc . 
 spirit . ask what thou wilt ; that i had said and done . 
 bolingbrok . [ read ] 'first of the king : what shall of him becom ? ' 
 spirit . the duke yet live that henri shall depos ; 
 but him outliv , and die a violent death . 
 [ as the spirit speak , southwel write the answer ] 
 bolingbrok . 'what fate await the duke of suffolk ? ' 
 spirit . by water shall he die and take hi end . 
 bolingbrok . 'what shall befal the duke of somerset ? ' 
 spirit . let him shun castl : 
 safer shall he be upon the sandi plain 
 than where castl mount stand . 
 have done , for more i hardli can endur . 
 bolingbrok . descend to dark and the burn lake ; 
 fals fiend , avoid ! thunder and lightn . exit spirit 
 
 enter the duke of york and the duke of 
 buckingham with guard , and break in 
 
 york . lay hand upon these traitor and their trash . 
 beldam , i think we watch 'd you at an inch . 
 what , madam , are you there ? the king and commonw 
 are deepli indebt for thi piec of pain ; 
 my lord protector will , i doubt it not , 
 see you well guerdon 'd for these good desert . 
 duchess . not half so bad as thine to england 's king , 
 injuri duke , that threatest where 's no caus . 
 buckingham . true , madam , none at all . what can you thi ? 
 away with them ! let them be clapp 'd up close , 
 and kept asund . you , madam , shall with us . 
 stafford , take her to thee . 
 we 'll see your trinket here all forthcom . 
 all , away ! 
 exeunt , abov , duchess and hume , guard ; below , 
 witch , southwel and bolingbrok , guard 
 york . lord buckingham , methink you watch 'd her well . 
 a pretti plot , well chosen to build upon ! 
 now , pray , my lord , let 's see the devil 's writ . 
 what have we here ? [ read ] 
 'the duke yet live that henri shall depos ; 
 but him outliv , and die a violent death . ' 
 whi , thi is just 
 'aio te , aeacida , romano vincer poss . ' 
 well , to the rest : 
 'tell me what fate await the duke of suffolk ? ' 
 'bi water shall he die and take hi end . ' 
 'what shall betid the duke of somerset ? ' 
 'let him shun castl ; 
 safer shall he be upon the sandi plain 
 than where castl mount stand . ' 
 come , come , my lord ; 
 these oracl are hardli attain 'd , 
 and hardli understood . 
 the king is now in progress toward saint alban , 
 with him the husband of thi love ladi ; 
 thither go these news as fast as hors can carri them- 
 a sorri breakfast for my lord protector . 
 buckingham . your grace shall give me leav , my lord of york , 
 to be the post , in hope of hi reward . 
 york . at your pleasur , my good lord . 
 who 's within there , ho ? 
 
 enter a serving-man 
 
 invit my lord of salisburi and warwick 
 to sup with me to-morrow night . away ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 saint alban 
 
 enter the king , queen , gloucest , cardin , and suffolk , 
 with falcon hallo 
 
 queen . believ me , lord , for fli at the brook , 
 i saw not better sport these seven year ' day ; 
 yet , by your leav , the wind wa veri high , 
 and ten to one old joan had not gone out . 
 king henri . but what a point , my lord , your falcon made , 
 and what a pitch she flew abov the rest ! 
 to see how god in all hi creatur work ! 
 yea , man and bird are fain of climb high . 
 suffolk . no marvel , an it like your majesti , 
 my lord protector 's hawk do tow ' r so well ; 
 they know their master love to be aloft , 
 and bear hi thought abov hi falcon 's pitch . 
 gloucest . my lord , 't is but a base ignobl mind 
 that mount no higher than a bird can soar . 
 cardin . i thought as much ; he would be abov the cloud . 
 gloucest . ay , my lord cardin , how think you by that ? 
 were it not good your grace could fli to heaven ? 
 king henri . the treasuri of everlast joy ! 
 cardin . thi heaven is on earth ; thine eye and thought 
 beat on a crown , the treasur of thi heart ; 
 pernici protector , danger peer , 
 that smooth'st it so with king and commonw . 
 gloucest . what , cardin , is your priesthood grown peremptori ? 
 tantaen animi coelestibu ira ? 
 churchmen so hot ? good uncl , hide such malic ; 
 with such holi can you do it ? 
 suffolk . no malic , sir ; no more than well becom 
 so good a quarrel and so bad a peer . 
 gloucest . as who , my lord ? 
 suffolk . whi , as you , my lord , 
 a n't like your lordli lord 's protectorship . 
 gloucest . whi , suffolk , england know thine insol . 
 queen . and thi ambit , gloucest . 
 king henri . i prithe , peac , 
 good queen , and whet not on these furiou peer ; 
 for bless are the peacemak on earth . 
 cardin . let me be bless for the peac i make 
 against thi proud protector with my sword ! 
 gloucest . [ asid to cardin ] faith , holi uncl , would 'twere 
 come to that ! 
 cardin . [ asid to gloucest ] marri , when thou dar'st . 
 gloucest . [ asid to cardin ] make up no factiou number for the 
 matter ; 
 in thine own person answer thi abus . 
 cardin . [ asid to gloucest ] ay , where thou dar'st not peep ; an 
 if thou dar'st , 
 thi even on the east side of the grove . 
 king henri . how now , my lord ! 
 cardin . believ me , cousin gloucest , 
 had not your man put up the fowl so suddenli , 
 we had had more sport . [ asid to gloucest ] come with thi 
 two-hand sword . 
 gloucest . true , uncl . 
 cardin . [ asid to gloucest ] are ye advi 'd ? the east side of 
 the grove ? 
 gloucest . [ asid to cardin ] cardin , i am with you . 
 king henri . whi , how now , uncl gloucest ! 
 gloucest . talk of hawk ; noth els , my lord . 
 [ asid to cardin ] now , by god 's mother , priest , 
 i 'll shave your crown for thi , 
 or all my fenc shall fail . 
 cardin . [ asid to gloucest ] medic , teipsum ; 
 protector , see to't well ; protect yourself . 
 king henri . the wind grow high ; so do your stomach , lord . 
 how irksom is thi music to my heart ! 
 when such string jar , what hope of harmoni ? 
 i pray , my lord , let me compound thi strife . 
 
 enter a townsman of saint alban , cri ' a miracl ! ' 
 
 gloucest . what mean thi nois ? 
 fellow , what miracl dost thou proclaim ? 
 townsman . a miracl ! a miracl ! 
 suffolk . come to the king , and tell him what miracl . 
 townsman . forsooth , a blind man at saint alban shrine 
 within thi half hour hath receiv 'd hi sight ; 
 a man that ne'er saw in hi life befor . 
 king henri . now god be prai 'd that to believ soul 
 give light in dark , comfort in despair ! 
 
 enter the mayor of saint alban and hi brethren , 
 bear simpcox between two in a chair ; 
 hi wife and a multitud follow 
 
 cardin . here come the townsmen on process 
 to present your high with the man . 
 king henri . great is hi comfort in thi earthli vale , 
 although by hi sight hi sin be multipli . 
 gloucest . stand by , my master ; bring him near the king ; 
 hi high ' pleasur is to talk with him . 
 king henri . good fellow , tell us here the circumst , 
 that we for thee may glorifi the lord . 
 what , hast thou been long blind and now restor 'd ? 
 simpcox . born blind , a n't pleas your grace . 
 wife . ay inde wa he . 
 suffolk . what woman is thi ? 
 wife . hi wife , a n't like your worship . 
 gloucest . hadst thou been hi mother , thou couldst have better 
 told . 
 king henri . where wert thou born ? 
 simpcox . at berwick in the north , a n't like your grace . 
 king henri . poor soul , god 's good hath been great to thee . 
 let never day nor night unhallow pass , 
 but still rememb what the lord hath done . 
 queen . tell me , good fellow , cam'st thou here by chanc , 
 or of devot , to thi holi shrine ? 
 simpcox . god know , of pure devot ; be call 'd 
 a hundr time and oft'ner , in my sleep , 
 by good saint alban , who said 'simpcox , come , 
 come , offer at my shrine , and i will help thee . ' 
 wife . most true , forsooth ; and mani time and oft 
 myself have heard a voic to call him so . 
 cardin . what , art thou lame ? 
 simpcox . ay , god almighti help me ! 
 suffolk . how cam'st thou so ? 
 simpcox . a fall off of a tree . 
 wife . a plum tree , master . 
 gloucest . how long hast thou been blind ? 
 simpcox . o , born so , master ! 
 gloucest . what , and wouldst climb a tree ? 
 simpcox . but that in all my life , when i wa a youth . 
 wife . too true ; and bought hi climb veri dear . 
 gloucest . mass , thou lov'dst plum well , that wouldst ventur so . 
 simpcox . ala , good master , my wife desir 'd some damson 
 and made me climb , with danger of my life . 
 gloucest . a subtl knave ! but yet it shall not serv : 
 let me see thine eye ; wink now ; now open them ; 
 in my opinion yet thou seest not well . 
 simpcox . ye , master , clear as day , i thank god and saint alban . 
 gloucest . say'st thou me so ? what colour is thi cloak of ? 
 simpcox . red , master ; red as blood . 
 gloucest . whi , that 's well said . what colour is my gown of ? 
 simpcox . black , forsooth ; coal-black as jet . 
 king henri . whi , then , thou know'st what colour jet is of ? 
 suffolk . and yet , i think , jet did he never see . 
 gloucest . but cloak and gown befor thi day a mani . 
 wife . never befor thi day in all hi life . 
 gloucest . tell me , sirrah , what 's my name ? 
 simpcox . ala , master , i know not . 
 gloucest . what 's hi name ? 
 simpcox . i know not . 
 gloucest . nor hi ? 
 simpcox . no , inde , master . 
 gloucest . what 's thine own name ? 
 simpcox . saunder simpcox , an if it pleas you , master . 
 gloucest . then , saunder , sit there , the lying'st knave in 
 christendom . if thou hadst been born blind , thou mightst as well 
 have known all our name as thu to name the sever colour we 
 do wear . sight may distinguish of colour ; but suddenli to 
 nomin them all , it is imposs . my lord , saint alban here 
 hath done a miracl ; and would ye not think hi cun to be 
 great that could restor thi crippl to hi leg again ? 
 simpcox . o master , that you could ! 
 gloucest . my master of saint alban , have you not beadl in 
 your town , and thing call 'd whip ? 
 mayor . ye , my lord , if it pleas your grace . 
 gloucest . then send for one present . 
 mayor . sirrah , go fetch the beadl hither straight . 
 exit an attend 
 gloucest . now fetch me a stool hither by and by . [ a stool 
 brought ] now , sirrah , if you mean to save yourself from whip , 
 leap me over thi stool and run away . 
 simpcox . ala , master , i am not abl to stand alon ! 
 you go about to tortur me in vain . 
 
 enter a beadl with whip 
 
 gloucest . well , sir , we must have you find your leg . 
 sirrah beadl , whip him till he leap over that same stool . 
 beadl . i will , my lord . come on , sirrah ; off with your doublet 
 quickli . 
 simpcox . ala , master , what shall i do ? i am not abl to stand . 
 
 after the beadl hath hit him onc , he leap over 
 the stool and run away ; and they follow and cri 
 ' a miracl ! ' 
 
 king henri . o god , seest thou thi , and bearest so long ? 
 queen . it made me laugh to see the villain run . 
 gloucest . follow the knave , and take thi drab away . 
 wife . ala , sir , we did it for pure need ! 
 gloucest . let them be whipp 'd through everi market town till they 
 come to berwick , from whenc they came . 
 exeunt mayor , beadl , wife , & c. 
 cardin . duke humphrey ha done a miracl to-day . 
 suffolk . true ; made the lame to leap and fli away . 
 gloucest . but you have done more miracl than i : 
 you made in a day , my lord , whole town to fli . 
 
 enter buckingham 
 
 king henri . what tide with our cousin buckingham ? 
 buckingham . such as my heart doth trembl to unfold : 
 a sort of naughti person , lewdli bent , 
 under the counten and confederaci 
 of ladi eleanor , the protector 's wife , 
 the ringlead and head of all thi rout , 
 have practi 'd danger against your state , 
 deal with witch and with conjur , 
 whom we have apprehend in the fact , 
 rais up wick spirit from under ground , 
 demand of king henri 's life and death 
 and other of your high ' privi council , 
 as more at larg your grace shall understand . 
 cardin . and so , my lord protector , by thi mean 
 your ladi is forthcom yet at london . 
 thi news , i think , hath turn 'd your weapon 's edg ; 
 't is like , my lord , you will not keep your hour . 
 gloucest . ambiti churchman , leav to afflict my heart . 
 sorrow and grief have vanquish 'd all my power ; 
 and , vanquish 'd as i am , i yield to the 
 or to the meanest groom . 
 king henri . o god , what mischief work the wick one , 
 heap confus on their own head therebi ! 
 queen . gloucest , see here the taintur of thi nest ; 
 and look thyself be faultless , thou wert best . 
 gloucest . madam , for myself , to heaven i do appeal 
 how i have lov 'd my king and commonw ; 
 and for my wife i know not how it stand . 
 sorri i am to hear what i have heard . 
 nobl she is ; but if she have forgot 
 honour and virtu , and conver 'd with such 
 as , like to pitch , defil nobil , 
 i banish her my bed and compani 
 and give her as a prey to law and shame , 
 that hath dishonour gloucest 's honest name . 
 king henri . well , for thi night we will repos us here . 
 to-morrow toward london back again 
 to look into thi busi thoroughli 
 and call these foul offend to their answer , 
 and pois the caus in justic ' equal scale , 
 whose beam stand sure , whose right caus prevail . 
 flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 london . the duke of york 's garden 
 
 enter york , salisburi , and warwick 
 
 york . now , my good lord of salisburi and warwick , 
 our simpl supper end , give me leav 
 in thi close walk to satisfi myself 
 in crave your opinion of my tide , 
 which is infal , to england 's crown . 
 salisburi . my lord , i long to hear it at full . 
 warwick . sweet york , begin ; and if thi claim be good , 
 the nevil are thi subject to command . 
 york . then thu : 
 edward the third , my lord , had seven son ; 
 the first , edward the black princ , princ of wale ; 
 the second , william of hatfield ; and the third , 
 lionel duke of clarenc ; next to whom 
 wa john of gaunt , the duke of lancast ; 
 the fifth wa edmund langley , duke of york ; 
 the sixth wa thoma of woodstock , duke of gloucest ; 
 william of windsor wa the seventh and last . 
 edward the black princ die befor hi father 
 and left behind him richard , hi onli son , 
 who , after edward the third 's death , reign 'd as king 
 till henri bolingbrok , duke of lancast , 
 the eldest son and heir of john of gaunt , 
 crown 'd by the name of henri the fourth , 
 seiz 'd on the realm , depo 'd the right king , 
 sent hi poor queen to franc , from whenc she came . 
 and him to pomfret , where , as all you know , 
 harmless richard wa murder traitor . 
 warwick . father , the duke hath told the truth ; 
 thu got the hous of lancast the crown . 
 york . which now they hold by forc , and not by right ; 
 for richard , the first son 's heir , be dead , 
 the issu of the next son should have reign 'd . 
 salisburi . but william of hatfield die without an heir . 
 york . the third son , duke of clarenc , from whose line 
 i claim the crown , had issu philipp , a daughter , 
 who marri edmund mortim , earl of march ; 
 edmund had issu , roger earl of march ; 
 roger had issu , edmund , ann , and eleanor . 
 salisburi . thi edmund , in the reign of bolingbrok , 
 as i have read , laid claim unto the crown ; 
 and , but for owen glendow , had been king , 
 who kept him in captiv till he die . 
 but , to the rest . 
 york . hi eldest sister , ann , 
 my mother , be heir unto the crown , 
 marri richard earl of cambridg , who wa 
 to edmund langley , edward the third 's fifth son , son . 
 by her i claim the kingdom : she wa heir 
 to roger earl of march , who wa the son 
 of edmund mortim , who marri philipp , 
 sole daughter unto lionel duke of clarenc ; 
 so , if the issu of the elder son 
 succeed befor the younger , i am king . 
 warwick . what plain proceed is more plain than thi ? 
 henri doth claim the crown from john of gaunt , 
 the fourth son : york claim it from the third . 
 till lionel 's issu fail , hi should not reign . 
 it fail not yet , but flourish in thee 
 and in thi son , fair slip of such a stock . 
 then , father salisburi , kneel we togeth , 
 and in thi privat plot be we the first 
 that shall salut our right sovereign 
 with honour of hi birthright to the crown . 
 both . long live our sovereign richard , england 's king ! 
 york . we thank you , lord . but i am not your king 
 till i be crown 'd , and that my sword be stain 'd 
 with heart-blood of the hous of lancast ; 
 and that 's not suddenli to be perform 'd , 
 but with advic and silent secreci . 
 do you as i do in these danger day : 
 wink at the duke of suffolk 's insol , 
 at beaufort 's pride , at somerset 's ambit , 
 at buckingham , and all the crew of them , 
 till they have snar 'd the shepherd of the flock , 
 that virtuou princ , the good duke humphrey ; 
 't is that they seek ; and they , in seek that , 
 shall find their death , if york can prophesi . 
 salisburi . my lord , break we off ; we know your mind at full . 
 warwick . my heart assur me that the earl of warwick 
 shall one day make the duke of york a king . 
 york . and , nevil , thi i do assur myself , 
 richard shall live to make the earl of warwick 
 the greatest man in england but the king . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 london . a hall of justic 
 
 sound trumpet . enter the king and state : the queen , gloucest , york , 
 suffolk , and salisburi , with guard , to banish the duchess . enter , guard , 
 the duchess of gloucest , margeri jourdain , hume , southwel , and bolingbrok 
 
 king henri . stand forth , dame eleanor cobham , gloucest 's wife : 
 in sight of god and us , your guilt is great ; 
 receiv the sentenc of the law for sin 
 such as by god 's book are adjudg 'd to death . 
 you four , from henc to prison back again ; 
 from thenc unto the place of execut : 
 the witch in smithfield shall be burnt to ash , 
 and you three shall be strangl on the gallow . 
 you , madam , for you are more nobli born , 
 despoil of your honour in your life , 
 shall , after three day ' open penanc done , 
 live in your countri here in banish 
 with sir john stanley in the isl of man . 
 duchess . welcom is banish ; welcom were my death . 
 gloucest . eleanor , the law , thou seest , hath judg thee . 
 i can not justifi whom the law condemn . 
 exeunt the duchess and the other prison , guard 
 mine eye are full of tear , my heart of grief . 
 ah , humphrey , thi dishonour in thine age 
 will bring thi head with sorrow to the ground ! 
 i beseech your majesti give me leav to go ; 
 sorrow would solac , and mine age would eas . 
 king henri . stay , humphrey duke of gloucest ; ere thou go , 
 give up thi staff ; henri will to himself 
 protector be ; and god shall be my hope , 
 my stay , my guid , and lantern to my feet . 
 and go in peac , humphrey , no less belov 'd 
 than when thou wert protector to thi king . 
 queen . i see no reason whi a king of year 
 should be to be protect like a child . 
 god and king henri govern england 's realm ! 
 give up your staff , sir , and the king hi realm . 
 gloucest . my staff ! here , nobl henri , is my staff . 
 as willingli do i the same resign 
 as ere thi father henri made it mine ; 
 and even as willingli at thi feet i leav it 
 as other would ambiti receiv it . 
 farewel , good king ; when i am dead and gone , 
 may honour peac attend thi throne ! exit 
 queen . whi , now is henri king , and margaret queen , 
 and humphrey duke of gloucest scarc himself , 
 that bear so shrewd a maim : two pull at once- 
 hi ladi banish 'd and a limb lopp 'd off . 
 thi staff of honour raught , there let it stand 
 where it best fit to be , in henri 's hand . 
 suffolk . thu droop thi lofti pine and hang hi spray ; 
 thu eleanor 's pride die in her youngest day . 
 york . lord , let him go . pleas it your majesti , 
 thi is the day appoint for the combat ; 
 and readi are the appel and defend , 
 the armour and hi man , to enter the list , 
 so pleas your high to behold the fight . 
 queen . ay , good my lord ; for purpos therefor 
 left i the court , to see thi quarrel tri . 
 king henri . a god 's name , see the list and all thing fit ; 
 here let them end it , and god defend the right ! 
 york . i never saw a fellow wors best , 
 or more afraid to fight , than is the appel , 
 the servant of hi armour , my lord . 
 
 enter at one door , horner , the armour , and hi 
 neighbour , drink to him so much that he is 
 drunk ; and he enter with a drum befor him and 
 hi staff with a sand-bag fasten to it ; and at the 
 other door peter , hi man , with a drum and sandbag , 
 and prentic drink to him 
 
 first neighbour . here , neighbour horner , i drink to you in a cup of 
 sack ; and fear not , neighbour , you shall do well enough . 
 second neighbour . and here , neighbour , here 's a cup of charneco . 
 third neighbour . and here 's a pot of good doubl beer , neighbour ; 
 drink , and fear not your man . 
 horner . let it come , i ' faith , and i 'll pledg you all ; and a fig 
 for peter ! 
 first prentic . here , peter , i drink to thee ; and be not afraid . 
 second prentic . be merri , peter , and fear not thi master : fight 
 for credit of the prentic . 
 peter . i thank you all . drink , and pray for me , i pray you ; for i 
 think i have taken my last draught in thi world . here , robin , an 
 if i die , i give thee my apron ; and , will , thou shalt have my 
 hammer ; and here , tom , take all the money that i have . o lord 
 bless me , i pray god ! for i am never abl to deal with my master , 
 he hath learnt so much fenc alreadi . 
 salisburi . come , leav your drink and fall to blow . 
 sirrah , what 's thi name ? 
 peter . peter , forsooth . 
 salisburi . peter ? what more ? 
 peter . thump . 
 salisburi . thump ? then see thou thump thi master well . 
 horner . master , i am come hither , as it were , upon my man 's 
 instig , to prove him a knave and myself an honest man ; and 
 touch the duke of york , i will take my death i never meant him 
 ani ill , nor the king , nor the queen ; and therefor , peter , have 
 at thee with a down right blow ! 
 york . dispatch- thi knave 's tongu begin to doubl . 
 sound , trumpet , alarum to the combat ! 
 [ alarum . they fight and peter strike him down ] 
 horner . hold , peter , hold ! i confess , i confess treason . 
 [ die ] 
 york . take away hi weapon . fellow , thank god , and the good wine in 
 thi master 's way . 
 peter . o god , have i overcom mine enemi in thi presenc ? o 
 peter , thou hast prevail 'd in right ! 
 king henri . go , take henc that traitor from our sight , 
 for by hi death we do perceiv hi guilt ; 
 and god in justic hath reveal 'd to us 
 the truth and innoc of thi poor fellow , 
 which he had thought to have murder 'd wrong . 
 come , fellow , follow us for thi reward . 
 sound a flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 london . a street 
 
 enter duke humphrey and hi men , in mourn cloak 
 
 gloucest . thu sometim hath the brightest day a cloud , 
 and after summer evermor succe 
 barren winter , with hi wrath nip cold ; 
 so care and joy abound , as season fleet . 
 sir , what 's o'clock ? 
 serving-man . ten , my lord . 
 gloucest . ten is the hour that wa appoint me 
 to watch the come of my punish 'd duchess . 
 uneath may she endur the flinti street 
 to tread them with her tender-feel feet . 
 sweet nell , ill can thi nobl mind abrook 
 the abject peopl gaze on thi face , 
 with enviou look , laugh at thi shame , 
 that erst did follow thi proud chariot wheel 
 when thou didst ride in triumph through the street . 
 but , soft ! i think she come , and i 'll prepar 
 my tear-stain 'd eye to see her miseri . 
 
 enter the duchess of gloucest in a white sheet , 
 and a taper burn in her hand , with sir john 
 stanley , the sheriff , and offic 
 
 serving-man . so pleas your grace , we 'll take her from the sheriff . 
 gloucest . no , stir not for your live ; let her pass by . 
 duchess . come you , my lord , to see my open shame ? 
 now thou dost penanc too . look how they gaze ! 
 see how the giddi multitud do point 
 and nod their head and throw their eye on thee ; 
 ah , gloucest , hide thee from their hate look , 
 and , in thi closet pent up , rue my shame 
 and ban thine enemi , both mine and thine ! 
 gloucest . be patient , gentl nell ; forget thi grief . 
 duchess . ah , gloucest , teach me to forget myself ! 
 for whilst i think i am thi marri wife 
 and thou a princ , protector of thi land , 
 methink i should not thu be led along , 
 mail 'd up in shame , with paper on my back , 
 and follow 'd with a rabbl that rejoic 
 to see my tear and hear my deep-fet groan . 
 the ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet , 
 and when i start , the enviou peopl laugh 
 and bid me be advis how i tread . 
 ah , humphrey , can i bear thi shame yoke ? 
 trowest thou that e'er i 'll look upon the world 
 or count them happi that enjoy the sun ? 
 no ; dark shall be my light and night my day ; 
 to think upon my pomp shall be my hell . 
 sometim i 'll say i am duke humphrey 's wife , 
 and he a princ , and ruler of the land ; 
 yet so he rul 'd , and such a princ he wa , 
 as he stood by whilst i , hi forlorn duchess , 
 wa made a wonder and a pointing-stock 
 to everi idl rascal follow . 
 but be thou mild , and blush not at my shame , 
 nor stir at noth till the axe of death 
 hang over thee , as sure it shortli will . 
 for suffolk- he that can do all in all 
 with her that hateth thee and hate us all- 
 and york , and impiou beaufort , that fals priest , 
 have all lim 'd bush to betray thi wing , 
 and , fli thou how thou canst , they 'll tangl thee . 
 but fear not thou until thi foot be snar 'd , 
 nor never seek prevent of thi foe . 
 gloucest . ah , nell , forbear ! thou aimest all awri . 
 i must offend befor i be attaint ; 
 and had i twenti time so mani foe , 
 and each of them had twenti time their power , 
 all these could not procur me ani scath 
 so long as i am loyal , true , and crimeless . 
 wouldst have me rescu thee from thi reproach ? 
 whi , yet thi scandal were not wip 'd away , 
 but i in danger for the breach of law . 
 thi greatest help is quiet , gentl nell . 
 i pray thee sort thi heart to patienc ; 
 these few day ' wonder will be quickli worn . 
 
 enter a herald 
 
 herald . i summon your grace to hi majesti 's parliament , 
 holden at buri the first of thi next month . 
 gloucest . and my consent ne'er ask 'd herein befor ! 
 thi is close deal . well , i will be there . exit herald 
 my nell , i take my leave- and , master sheriff , 
 let not her penanc exceed the king 's commiss . 
 sheriff . a n't pleas your grace , here my commiss stay ; 
 and sir john stanley is appoint now 
 to take her with him to the isl of man . 
 gloucest . must you , sir john , protect my ladi here ? 
 stanley . so am i given in charg , may't pleas your grace . 
 gloucest . entreat her not the wors in that i pray 
 you use her well ; the world may laugh again , 
 and i may live to do you kind if 
 you do it her . and so , sir john , farewel . 
 duchess . what , gone , my lord , and bid me not farewel ! 
 gloucest . wit my tear , i can not stay to speak . 
 exeunt gloucest and servant 
 duchess . art thou gone too ? all comfort go with thee ! 
 for none abid with me . my joy is death- 
 death , at whose name i oft have been afeard , 
 becaus i wish 'd thi world 's etern . 
 stanley , i prithe go , and take me henc ; 
 i care not whither , for i beg no favour , 
 onli convey me where thou art command . 
 stanley . whi , madam , that is to the isl of man , 
 there to be us 'd accord to your state . 
 duchess . that 's bad enough , for i am but reproach- 
 and shall i then be us 'd reproach ? 
 stanley . like to a duchess and duke humphrey 's ladi ; 
 accord to that state you shall be us 'd . 
 duchess . sheriff , farewel , and better than i fare , 
 although thou hast been conduct of my shame . 
 sheriff . it is my offic ; and , madam , pardon me . 
 duchess . ay , ay , farewel ; thi offic is discharg 'd . 
 come , stanley , shall we go ? 
 stanley . madam , your penanc done , throw off thi sheet , 
 and go we to attir you for our journey . 
 duchess . my shame will not be shift with my sheet . 
 no , it will hang upon my richest robe 
 and show itself , attir me how i can . 
 go , lead the way ; i long to see my prison . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 the abbey at buri st. edmund 
 
 sound a sennet . enter the king , the queen , cardin , suffolk , york , 
 buckingham , salisburi , and warwick , to the parliament 
 
 king henri . i muse my lord of gloucest is not come . 
 't is not hi wont to be the hindmost man , 
 whate' occas keep him from us now . 
 queen . can you not see , or will ye not observ 
 the strang of hi alter 'd counten ? 
 with what a majesti he bear himself ; 
 how insol of late he is becom , 
 how proud , how peremptori , and unlik himself ? 
 we know the time sinc he wa mild and affabl , 
 and if we did but glanc a far-off look 
 immedi he wa upon hi knee , 
 that all the court admir 'd him for submiss . 
 but meet him now and be it in the morn , 
 when everi one will give the time of day , 
 he knit hi brow and show an angri eye 
 and passeth by with stiff unbow knee , 
 disdain duti that to us belong . 
 small cur are not regard when they grin , 
 but great men trembl when the lion roar , 
 and humphrey is no littl man in england . 
 first note that he is near you in descent , 
 and should you fall he is the next will mount ; 
 me seemeth , then , it is no policy- 
 respect what a rancor mind he bear , 
 and hi advantag follow your decease- 
 that he should come about your royal person 
 or be admit to your high ' council . 
 by flatteri hath he won the common ' heart ; 
 and when he pleas to make commot , 
 't is to be fear 'd they all will follow him . 
 now 't is the spring , and weed are shallow-root ; 
 suffer them now , and they 'll o'ergrow the garden 
 and choke the herb for want of husbandri . 
 the rever care i bear unto my lord 
 made me collect these danger in the duke . 
 if it be fond , can it a woman 's fear ; 
 which fear if better reason can supplant , 
 i will subscrib , and say i wrong 'd the duke . 
 my lord of suffolk , buckingham , and york , 
 reprov my alleg if you can , 
 or els conclud my word effectu . 
 suffolk . well hath your high seen into thi duke ; 
 and had i first been put to speak my mind , 
 i think i should have told your grace 's tale . 
 the duchess , by hi suborn , 
 upon my life , began her devilish practic ; 
 or if he were not privi to those fault , 
 yet by reput of hi high descent- 
 as next the king he wa success heir- 
 and such high vaunt of hi nobil , 
 did instig the bedlam brainsick duchess 
 by wick mean to frame our sovereign 's fall . 
 smooth run the water where the brook is deep , 
 and in hi simpl show he harbour treason . 
 the fox bark not when he would steal the lamb . 
 no , no , my sovereign , gloucest is a man 
 unsound yet , and full of deep deceit . 
 cardin . did he not , contrari to form of law , 
 devis strang death for small offenc done ? 
 york . and did he not , in hi protectorship , 
 levi great sum of money through the realm 
 for soldier ' pay in franc , and never sent it ? 
 by mean whereof the town each day revolt . 
 buckingham . tut , these are petti fault to fault unknown 
 which time will bring to light in smooth duke humphrey . 
 king henri . my lord , at onc : the care you have of us , 
 to mow down thorn that would annoy our foot , 
 is worthi prais ; but shall i speak my conscienc ? 
 our kinsman gloucest is as innoc 
 from mean treason to our royal person 
 as is the suck lamb or harmless dove : 
 the duke is virtuou , mild , and too well given 
 to dream on evil or to work my downfal . 
 queen . ah , what 's more danger than thi fond affianc ? 
 seem he a dove ? hi feather are but borrow 'd , 
 for he 's dispos as the hate raven . 
 is he a lamb ? hi skin is sure lent him , 
 for he 's inclin 'd as is the raven wolf . 
 who can not steal a shape that mean deceit ? 
 take heed , my lord ; the welfar of us all 
 hang on the cut short that fraud man . 
 
 enter somerset 
 
 somerset . all health unto my graciou sovereign ! 
 king henri . welcom , lord somerset . what news from franc ? 
 somerset . that all your interest in those territori 
 is utterli bereft you ; all is lost . 
 king henri . cold news , lord somerset ; but god 's will be done ! 
 york . [ asid ] cold news for me ; for i had hope of franc 
 as firmli as i hope for fertil england . 
 thu are my blossom blast in the bud , 
 and caterpillar eat my leav away ; 
 but i will remedi thi gear ere long , 
 or sell my titl for a gloriou grave . 
 
 enter gloucest 
 
 gloucest . all happi unto my lord the king ! 
 pardon , my lieg , that i have stay 'd so long . 
 suffolk . nay , gloucest , know that thou art come too soon , 
 unless thou wert more loyal than thou art . 
 i do arrest thee of high treason here . 
 gloucest . well , suffolk , thou shalt not see me blush 
 nor chang my counten for thi arrest : 
 a heart unspot is not easili daunt . 
 the purest spring is not so free from mud 
 as i am clear from treason to my sovereign . 
 who can accus me ? wherein am i guilti ? 
 york . 't is thought , my lord , that you took bribe of franc 
 and , be protector , stay 'd the soldier ' pay ; 
 by mean whereof hi high hath lost franc . 
 gloucest . is it but thought so ? what are they that think it ? 
 i never robb 'd the soldier of their pay 
 nor ever had one penni bribe from franc . 
 so help me god , as i have watch 'd the night- 
 ay , night by night- in studi good for england ! 
 that doit that e'er i wrest from the king , 
 or ani groat i hoard to my use , 
 be brought against me at my trial-day ! 
 no ; mani a pound of mine own proper store , 
 becaus i would not tax the needi common , 
 have i dispurs to the garrison , 
 and never ask 'd for restitut . 
 cardin . it serv you well , my lord , to say so much . 
 gloucest . i say no more than truth , so help me god ! 
 york . in your protectorship you did devis 
 strang tortur for offend , never heard of , 
 that england wa defam 'd by tyranni . 
 gloucest . whi , 't is well known that while i wa protector 
 piti wa all the fault that wa in me ; 
 for i should melt at an offend 's tear , 
 and lowli word were ransom for their fault . 
 unless it were a bloodi murder , 
 or foul feloni thief that fleec 'd poor passeng , 
 i never gave them condign punish . 
 murder inde , that bloodi sin , i tortur 'd 
 abov the felon or what trespass els . 
 suffolk . my lord , these fault are easi , quickli answer 'd ; 
 but mightier crime are laid unto your charg , 
 whereof you can not easili purg yourself . 
 i do arrest you in hi high ' name , 
 and here commit you to my lord cardin 
 to keep until your further time of trial . 
 king henri . my lord of gloucest , 't is my special hope 
 that you will clear yourself from all suspens . 
 my conscienc tell me you are innoc . 
 gloucest . ah , graciou lord , these day are danger ! 
 virtu is chok 'd with foul ambit , 
 and chariti cha 'd henc by rancour 's hand ; 
 foul suborn is predomin , 
 and equiti exil 'd your high ' land . 
 i know their complot is to have my life ; 
 and if my death might make thi island happi 
 and prove the period of their tyranni , 
 i would expend it with all willing . 
 but mine is made the prologu to their play ; 
 for thousand more that yet suspect no peril 
 will not conclud their plot tragedi . 
 beaufort 's red sparkl eye blab hi heart 's malic , 
 and suffolk 's cloudi brow hi stormi hate ; 
 sharp buckingham unburden with hi tongu 
 the enviou load that lie upon hi heart ; 
 and dog york , that reach at the moon , 
 whose overween arm i have pluck 'd back , 
 by fals accus doth level at my life . 
 and you , my sovereign ladi , with the rest , 
 causeless have laid disgrac on my head , 
 and with your best endeavour have stirr 'd up 
 my liefest lieg to be mine enemi ; 
 ay , all of you have laid your head together- 
 myself had notic of your conventicles- 
 and all to make away my guiltless life . 
 i shall not want fals wit to condemn me 
 nor store of treason to augment my guilt . 
 the ancient proverb will be well effect : 
 ' a staff is quickli found to beat a dog . ' 
 cardin . my lieg , hi rail is intoler . 
 if those that care to keep your royal person 
 from treason 's secret knife and traitor 's rage 
 be thu upbraid , chid , and rate at , 
 and the offend grant scope of speech , 
 'twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace . 
 suffolk . hath he not twit our sovereign ladi here 
 with ignomini word , though clerkli couch 'd , 
 as if she had suborn some to swear 
 fals alleg to o'erthrow hi state ? 
 queen . but i can give the loser leav to chide . 
 gloucest . far truer spoke than meant : i lose inde . 
 beshrew the winner , for they play 'd me fals ! 
 and well such loser may have leav to speak . 
 buckingham . he 'll wrest the sens , and hold us here all day . 
 lord cardin , he is your prison . 
 cardin . sir , take away the duke , and guard him sure . 
 gloucest . ah , thu king henri throw away hi crutch 
 befor hi leg be firm to bear hi bodi ! 
 thu is the shepherd beaten from thi side , 
 and wolv are gnarl who shall gnaw thee first . 
 ah , that my fear were fals ! ah , that it were ! 
 for , good king henri , thi decay i fear . exit , guard 
 king henri . my lord , what to your wisdom seemeth best 
 do or undo , as if ourself were here . 
 queen . what , will your high leav the parliament ? 
 king henri . ay , margaret ; my heart is drown 'd with grief , 
 whose flood begin to flow within mine eye ; 
 my bodi round engirt with misery- 
 for what 's more miser than discont ? 
 ah , uncl humphrey , in thi face i see 
 the map of honour , truth , and loyalti ! 
 and yet , good humphrey , is the hour to come 
 that e'er i prov 'd thee fals or fear 'd thi faith . 
 what lour star now envi thi estat 
 that these great lord , and margaret our queen , 
 do seek subvers of thi harmless life ? 
 thou never didst them wrong , nor no man wrong ; 
 and as the butcher take away the calf , 
 and bind the wretch , and beat it when it stray , 
 bear it to the bloodi slaughter-hous , 
 even so , remorseless , have they born him henc ; 
 and as the dam run low up and down , 
 look the way her harmless young one went , 
 and can do nought but wail her darl 's loss , 
 even so myself bewail good gloucest 's case 
 with sad unhelp tear , and with dimm 'd eye 
 look after him , and can not do him good , 
 so mighti are hi vow enemi . 
 hi fortun i will weep , and 'twixt each groan 
 say 'who 's a traitor ? gloucest he is none . ' exit 
 queen . free lord , cold snow melt with the sun 's hot beam : 
 henri my lord is cold in great affair , 
 too full of foolish piti ; and gloucest 's show 
 beguil him as the mourn crocodil 
 with sorrow snare relent passeng ; 
 or as the snake , roll 'd in a flow'r bank , 
 with shine checker 'd slough , doth sting a child 
 that for the beauti think it excel . 
 believ me , lord , were none more wise than i- 
 and yet herein i judg mine own wit good- 
 thi gloucest should be quickli rid the world 
 to rid us from the fear we have of him . 
 cardin . that he should die is worthi polici ; 
 but yet we want a colour for hi death . 
 't is meet he be condemn 'd by cours of law . 
 suffolk . but , in my mind , that were no polici : 
 the king will labour still to save hi life ; 
 the common hapli rise to save hi life ; 
 and yet we have but trivial argument , 
 more than mistrust , that show him worthi death . 
 york . so that , by thi , you would not have him die . 
 suffolk . ah , york , no man aliv so fain as i ! 
 york . 't is york that hath more reason for hi death . 
 but , my lord cardin , and you , my lord of suffolk , 
 say as you think , and speak it from your soul : 
 were't not all one an empti eagl were set 
 to guard the chicken from a hungri kite 
 as place duke humphrey for the king 's protector ? 
 queen . so the poor chicken should be sure of death . 
 suffolk . madam , 't is true ; and were't not mad then 
 to make the fox surveyor of the fold ? 
 who be accu 'd a crafti murder , 
 hi guilt should be but idli post over , 
 becaus hi purpos is not execut . 
 no ; let him die , in that he is a fox , 
 by natur prov 'd an enemi to the flock , 
 befor hi chap be stain 'd with crimson blood , 
 as humphrey , prov 'd by reason , to my lieg . 
 and do not stand on quillet how to slay him ; 
 be it by gin , by snare , by subtleti , 
 sleep or wake , 't is no matter how , 
 so he be dead ; for that is good deceit 
 which mate him first that first intend deceit . 
 queen . thrice-nobl suffolk , 't is resolut spoke . 
 suffolk . not resolut , except so much were done , 
 for thing are often spoke and seldom meant ; 
 but that my heart accordeth with my tongu , 
 see the deed is meritori , 
 and to preserv my sovereign from hi foe , 
 say but the word , and i will be hi priest . 
 cardin . but i would have him dead , my lord of suffolk , 
 ere you can take due order for a priest ; 
 say you consent and censur well the deed , 
 and i 'll provid hi executioner- 
 i tender so the safeti of my lieg . 
 suffolk . here is my hand the deed is worthi do . 
 queen . and so say i . 
 york . and i. and now we three have spoke it , 
 it skill not greatli who impugn our doom . 
 
 enter a post 
 
 post . great lord , from ireland am i come amain 
 to signifi that rebel there are up 
 and put the englishmen unto the sword . 
 send succour , lord , and stop the rage betim , 
 befor the wound do grow uncur ; 
 for , be green , there is great hope of help . 
 cardin . a breach that crave a quick expedi stop ! 
 what counsel give you in thi weighti caus ? 
 york . that somerset be sent as regent thither ; 
 't is meet that lucki ruler be employ 'd , 
 wit the fortun he hath had in franc . 
 somerset . if york , with all hi far-fet polici , 
 had been the regent there instead of me , 
 he never would have stay 'd in franc so long . 
 york . no , not to lose it all as thou hast done . 
 i rather would have lost my life betim 
 than bring a burden of dishonour home 
 by stay there so long till all were lost . 
 show me one scar charact 'd on thi skin : 
 men 's flesh preserv 'd so whole do seldom win . 
 queen . nay then , thi spark will prove a rage fire , 
 if wind and fuel be brought to feed it with ; 
 no more , good york ; sweet somerset , be still . 
 thi fortun , york , hadst thou been regent there , 
 might happili have prov 'd far wors than hi . 
 york . what , wors than nought ? nay , then a shame take all ! 
 somerset . and in the number , thee that wishest shame ! 
 cardin . my lord of york , tri what your fortun is . 
 th ' uncivil kern of ireland are in arm 
 and temper clay with blood of englishmen ; 
 to ireland will you lead a band of men , 
 collect choic , from each counti some , 
 and tri your hap against the irishmen ? 
 york . i will , my lord , so pleas hi majesti . 
 suffolk . whi , our author is hi consent , 
 and what we do establish he confirm ; 
 then , nobl york , take thou thi task in hand . 
 york . i am content ; provid me soldier , lord , 
 while i take order for mine own affair . 
 suffolk . a charg , lord york , that i will see perform 'd . 
 but now return we to the fals duke humphrey . 
 cardin . no more of him ; for i will deal with him 
 that henceforth he shall troubl us no more . 
 and so break off ; the day is almost spent . 
 lord suffolk , you and i must talk of that event . 
 york . my lord of suffolk , within fourteen day 
 at bristol i expect my soldier ; 
 for there i 'll ship them all for ireland . 
 suffolk . i 'll see it truli done , my lord of york . 
 exeunt all but york 
 york . now , york , or never , steel thi fear thought 
 and chang misdoubt to resolut ; 
 be that thou hop'st to be ; or what thou art 
 resign to death- it is not worth th ' enjoy . 
 let pale-fac 'd fear keep with the mean-born man 
 and find no harbour in a royal heart . 
 faster than spring-tim show'r come thought on thought , 
 and not a thought but think on digniti . 
 my brain , more busi than the labour spider , 
 weav tediou snare to trap mine enemi . 
 well , nobl , well , 't is politicli done 
 to send me pack with an host of men . 
 i fear me you but warm the starv snake , 
 who , cherish 'd in your breast , will sting your heart . 
 't wa men i lack 'd , and you will give them me ; 
 i take it kindli . yet be well assur 'd 
 you put sharp weapon in a madman 's hand . 
 while i in ireland nourish a mighti band , 
 i will stir up in england some black storm 
 shall blow ten thousand soul to heaven or hell ; 
 and thi fell tempest shall not ceas to rage 
 until the golden circuit on my head , 
 like to the gloriou sun 's transpar beam , 
 do calm the furi of thi mad-br flaw . 
 and for a minist of my intent 
 i have seduc 'd a headstrong kentishman , 
 john cade of ashford , 
 to make commot , as full well he can , 
 under the tide of john mortim . 
 in ireland have i seen thi stubborn cade 
 oppos himself against a troop of kern , 
 and fought so long tiff that hi thigh with dart 
 were almost like a sharp-quil 'd porpentin ; 
 and in the end be rescu 'd , i have seen 
 him caper upright like a wild morisco , 
 shake the bloodi dart as he hi bell . 
 full often , like a shag-hair 'd crafti kern , 
 hath he convers with the enemi , 
 and undiscov 'd come to me again 
 and given me notic of their villaini . 
 thi devil here shall be my substitut ; 
 for that john mortim , which now is dead , 
 in face , in gait , in speech , he doth resembl . 
 by thi i shall perceiv the common ' mind , 
 how they affect the hous and claim of york . 
 say he be taken , rack 'd , and tortur ; 
 i know no pain they can inflict upon him 
 will make him say i mov 'd him to those arm . 
 say that he thrive , as 't is great like he will , 
 whi , then from ireland come i with my strength , 
 and reap the harvest which that rascal sow 'd ; 
 for humphrey be dead , as he shall be , 
 and henri put apart , the next for me . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 buri st. edmund . a room of state 
 
 enter two or three murder run over the stage , 
 from the murder of duke humphrey 
 
 first murder . run to my lord of suffolk ; let him know 
 we have dispatch 'd the duke , as he command . 
 second murder . o that it were to do ! what have we done ? 
 didst ever hear a man so penit ? 
 
 enter suffolk 
 
 first murder . here come my lord . 
 suffolk . now , sir , have you dispatch 'd thi thing ? 
 first murder . ay , my good lord , he 's dead . 
 suffolk . whi , that 's well said . go , get you to my hous ; 
 i will reward you for thi ventur deed . 
 the king and all the peer are here at hand . 
 have you laid fair the bed ? is all thing well , 
 accord as i gave direct ? 
 first murder . 't is , my good lord . 
 suffolk . away ! be gone . exeunt murder 
 
 sound trumpet . enter the king , the queen , 
 cardin , somerset , with attend 
 
 king henri . go call our uncl to our presenc straight ; 
 say we intend to tri hi grace to-day , 
 if he be guilti , as 't is publish . 
 suffolk . i 'll call him present , my nobl lord . exit 
 king henri . lord , take your place ; and , i pray you all , 
 proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncl gloucest 
 than from true evid , of good esteem , 
 he be approv 'd in practic culpabl . 
 queen . god forbid ani malic should prevail 
 that faultless may condemn a nobleman ! 
 pray god he may acquit him of suspicion ! 
 king henri . i thank thee , meg ; these word content me much . 
 
 re-ent suffolk 
 
 how now ! whi look'st thou pale ? whi tremblest thou ? 
 where is our uncl ? what 's the matter , suffolk ? 
 suffolk . dead in hi bed , my lord ; gloucest is dead . 
 queen . marri , god forfend ! 
 cardin . god 's secret judgment ! i did dream to-night 
 the duke wa dumb and could not speak a word . 
 [ the king swoon ] 
 queen . how fare my lord ? help , lord ! the king is dead . 
 somerset . rear up hi bodi ; wring him by the nose . 
 queen . run , go , help , help ! o henri , ope thine eye ! 
 suffolk . he doth reviv again ; madam , be patient . 
 king . o heavenli god ! 
 queen . how fare my graciou lord ? 
 suffolk . comfort , my sovereign ! graciou henri , comfort ! 
 king henri . what , doth my lord of suffolk comfort me ? 
 came he right now to sing a raven 's note , 
 whose dismal tune bereft my vital pow'r ; 
 and think he that the chirp of a wren , 
 by cri comfort from a hollow breast , 
 can chase away the first conceiv sound ? 
 hide not thi poison with such sug'r word ; 
 lay not thi hand on me ; forbear , i say , 
 their touch affright me as a serpent 's sting . 
 thou bale messeng , out of my sight ! 
 upon thi eye-bal murder tyranni 
 sit in grim majesti to fright the world . 
 look not upon me , for thine eye are wound ; 
 yet do not go away ; come , basilisk , 
 and kill the innoc gazer with thi sight ; 
 for in the shade of death i shall find joy- 
 in life but doubl death , 'now gloucest 's dead . 
 queen . whi do you rate my lord of suffolk thu ? 
 although the duke wa enemi to him , 
 yet he most christian-lik lament hi death ; 
 and for myself- foe as he wa to me- 
 might liquid tear , or heart-offend groan , 
 or blood-consum sigh , recal hi life , 
 i would be blind with weep , sick with groan , 
 look pale as primros with blood-drink sigh , 
 and all to have the nobl duke aliv . 
 what know i how the world may deem of me ? 
 for it is known we were but hollow friend : 
 it may be judg 'd i made the duke away ; 
 so shall my name with slander 's tongu be wound , 
 and princ ' court be fill 'd with my reproach . 
 thi get i by hi death . ay me , unhappi ! 
 to be a queen and crown 'd with infami ! 
 king henri . ah , woe is me for gloucest , wretch man ! 
 queen . be woe for me , more wretch than he is . 
 what , dost thou turn away , and hide thi face ? 
 i am no loathsom leper- look on me . 
 what , art thou like the adder waxen deaf ? 
 be poison too , and kill thi forlorn queen . 
 is all thi comfort shut in gloucest 's tomb ? 
 whi , then dame margaret wa ne'er thi joy . 
 erect hi statu and worship it , 
 and make my imag but an alehous sign . 
 wa i for thi nigh wreck 'd upon the sea , 
 and twice by awkward wind from england 's bank 
 drove back again unto my nativ clime ? 
 what bode thi but well-forewarn wind 
 did seem to say 'seek not a scorpion 's nest , 
 nor set no foot on thi unkind shore ' ? 
 what did i then but cur 'd the gentl gust , 
 and he that loo 'd them forth their brazen cave ; 
 and bid them blow toward england 's bless shore , 
 or turn our stern upon a dread rock ? 
 yet aeolu would not be a murder , 
 but left that hate offic unto thee . 
 the pretty-vault sea refu 'd to drown me , 
 know that thou wouldst have me drown 'd on shore 
 with tear as salt as sea through thi unkind ; 
 the split rock cow ' r 'd in the sink sand 
 and would not dash me with their rag side , 
 becaus thi flinti heart , more hard than they , 
 might in thi palac perish margaret . 
 as far as i could ken thi chalki cliff , 
 when from thi shore the tempest beat us back , 
 i stood upon the hatch in the storm ; 
 and when the duski sky began to rob 
 my earnest-gap sight of thi land 's view , 
 i took a costli jewel from my neck- 
 a heart it wa , bound in with diamonds- 
 and threw it toward thi land . the sea receiv 'd it ; 
 and so i wish 'd thi bodi might my heart . 
 and even with thi i lost fair england 's view , 
 and bid mine eye be pack with my heart , 
 and call 'd them blind and duski spectacl 
 for lose ken of albion 's wish coast . 
 how often have i tempt suffolk 's tongue- 
 the agent of thi foul inconstancy- 
 to sit and witch me , as ascaniu did 
 when he to mad dido would unfold 
 hi father 's act commenc 'd in burn troy ! 
 am i not witch 'd like her ? or thou not fals like him ? 
 ay me , i can no more ! die , margaret , 
 for henri weep that thou dost live so long . 
 
 nois within . enter warwick , salisburi , 
 and mani common 
 
 warwick . it is report , mighti sovereign , 
 that good duke humphrey traitor is murd'r 
 by suffolk and the cardin beaufort 's mean . 
 the common , like an angri hive of bee 
 that want their leader , scatter up and down 
 and care not who they sting in hi reveng . 
 myself have calm 'd their spleen mutini 
 until they hear the order of hi death . 
 king henri . that he is dead , good warwick , 't is too true ; 
 but how he die god know , not henri . 
 enter hi chamber , view hi breathless corps , 
 and comment then upon hi sudden death . 
 warwick . that shall i do , my lieg . stay , salisburi , 
 with the rude multitud till i return . exit 
 exit salisburi with the common 
 king henri . o thou that judgest all thing , stay my thoughts- 
 my thought that labour to persuad my soul 
 some violent hand were laid on humphrey 's life ! 
 if my suspect be fals , forgiv me , god ; 
 for judgment onli doth belong to thee . 
 fain would i go to chafe hi pali lip 
 with twenti thousand kiss and to drain 
 upon hi face an ocean of salt tear 
 to tell my love unto hi dumb deaf trunk ; 
 and with my finger feel hi hand un-feel ; 
 but all in vain are these mean obsequi ; 
 and to survey hi dead and earthi imag , 
 what were it but to make my sorrow greater ? 
 
 bed put forth with the bodi . enter warwick 
 
 warwick . come hither , graciou sovereign , view thi bodi . 
 king henri . that is to see how deep my grave is made ; 
 for with hi soul fled all my worldli solac , 
 for , see him , i see my life in death . 
 warwick . as sure as my soul intend to live 
 with that dread king that took our state upon him 
 to free us from hi father 's wrath curs , 
 i do believ that violent hand were laid 
 upon the life of thi thrice-fam duke . 
 suffolk . a dread oath , sworn with a solemn tongu ! 
 what instanc give lord warwick for hi vow ? 
 warwick . see how the blood is settl in hi face . 
 oft have i seen a timely-part ghost , 
 of ashi semblanc , meagr , pale , and bloodless , 
 be all descend to the labour heart , 
 who , in the conflict that it hold with death , 
 attract the same for aidanc 'gainst the enemi , 
 which with the heart there cool , and ne'er returneth 
 to blush and beautifi the cheek again . 
 but see , hi face is black and full of blood ; 
 hi eye-bal further out than when he liv 'd , 
 stare full ghastli like a strangl man ; 
 hi hair uprear 'd , hi nostril stretch 'd with struggl ; 
 hi hand abroad display 'd , as one that grasp 'd 
 and tugg 'd for life , and wa by strength subdu 'd . 
 look , on the sheet hi hair , you see , is stick ; 
 hi well-proport 'd beard made rough and rug , 
 like to the summer 's corn by tempest lodg . 
 it can not be but he wa murd'r here : 
 the least of all these sign were probabl . 
 suffolk . whi , warwick , who should do the duke to death ? 
 myself and beaufort had him in protect ; 
 and we , i hope , sir , are no murder . 
 warwick . but both of you were vow 'd duke humphrey 's foe ; 
 and you , forsooth , had the good duke to keep . 
 't is like you would not feast him like a friend ; 
 and 't is well seen he found an enemi . 
 queen . then you , belik , suspect these noblemen 
 as guilti of duke humphrey 's timeless death . 
 warwick . who find the heifer dead and bleed fresh , 
 and see fast by a butcher with an axe , 
 but will suspect 't wa he that made the slaughter ? 
 who find the partridg in the puttock 's nest 
 but may imagin how the bird wa dead , 
 although the kite soar with unbloodi beak ? 
 even so suspici is thi tragedi . 
 queen . are you the butcher , suffolk ? where 's your knife ? 
 is beaufort term 'd a kite ? where are hi talon ? 
 suffolk . i wear no knife to slaughter sleep men ; 
 but here 's a veng sword , rust with eas , 
 that shall be scour in hi rancor heart 
 that slander me with murder 's crimson badg . 
 say if thou dar'st , proud lord of warwickshir , 
 that i am faulti in duke humphrey 's death . 
 exeunt cardin , somerset , and other 
 warwick . what dare not warwick , if fals suffolk dare him ? 
 queen . he dare not calm hi contumeli spirit , 
 nor ceas to be an arrog control , 
 though suffolk dare him twenti thousand time . 
 warwick . madam , be still- with rever may i say ; 
 for everi word you speak in hi behalf 
 is slander to your royal digniti . 
 suffolk . blunt-wit lord , ignobl in demeanour , 
 if ever ladi wrong 'd her lord so much , 
 thi mother took into her blame bed 
 some stern untutor 'd churl , and nobl stock 
 wa graft with crab-tre slip , whose fruit thou art , 
 and never of the nevil ' nobl race . 
 warwick . but that the guilt of murder buckler thee , 
 and i should rob the deathsman of hi fee , 
 quit thee therebi of ten thousand shame , 
 and that my sovereign 's presenc make me mild , 
 i would , fals murd'rou coward , on thi knee 
 make thee beg pardon for thi pass speech 
 and say it wa thi mother that thou meant'st , 
 that thou thyself wa born in bastardi ; 
 and , after all thi fear homag done , 
 give thee thi hire and send thi soul to hell , 
 pernici blood-suck of sleep men . 
 suffolk . thou shalt be wake while i shed thi blood , 
 if from thi presenc thou dar'st go with me . 
 warwick . away even now , or i will drag thee henc . 
 unworthi though thou art , i 'll cope with thee , 
 and do some servic to duke humphrey 's ghost . 
 exeunt suffolk and warwick 
 king henri . what stronger breastplat than a heart untaint ? 
 thrice is he arm 'd that hath hi quarrel just ; 
 and he but nake , though lock 'd up in steel , 
 whose conscienc with injustic is corrupt . 
 [ a nois within ] 
 queen . what nois is thi ? 
 
 re-ent suffolk and warwick , with their weapon drawn 
 
 king . whi , how now , lord , your wrath weapon drawn 
 here in our presenc ! dare you be so bold ? 
 whi , what tumultu clamour have we here ? 
 suffolk . the trait'rou warwick , with the men of buri , 
 set all upon me , mighti sovereign . 
 
 re-ent salisburi 
 
 salisburi . [ to the common within ] sir , stand apart , the king 
 shall know your mind . 
 dread lord , the common send you word by me 
 unless lord suffolk straight be done to death , 
 or banish fair england 's territori , 
 they will by violenc tear him from your palac 
 and tortur him with grievou ling'r death . 
 they say by him the good duke humphrey die ; 
 they say in him they fear your high ' death ; 
 and mere instinct of love and loyalti , 
 free from a stubborn opposit intent , 
 as be thought to contradict your like , 
 make them thu forward in hi banish . 
 they say , in care of your most royal person , 
 that if your high should intend to sleep 
 and charg that no man should disturb your rest , 
 in pain of your dislik or pain of death , 
 yet , notwithstand such a strait edict , 
 were there a serpent seen with fork tongu 
 that slili glide toward your majesti , 
 it were but necessari you were wak 'd , 
 lest , be suffer 'd in that harm slumber , 
 the mortal worm might make the sleep etern . 
 and therefor do they cri , though you forbid , 
 that they will guard you , whe'er you will or no , 
 from such fell serpent as fals suffolk is ; 
 with whose envenom and fatal sting 
 your love uncl , twenti time hi worth , 
 they say , is shame bereft of life . 
 common . [ within ] an answer from the king , my lord of salisburi ! 
 suffolk . 't is like the common , rude unpolish 'd hind , 
 could send such messag to their sovereign ; 
 but you , my lord , were glad to be employ 'd , 
 to show how quaint an orat you are . 
 but all the honour salisburi hath won 
 is that he wa the lord ambassador 
 sent from a sort of tinker to the king . 
 common . [ within ] an answer from the king , or we will all break in ! 
 king henri . go , salisburi , and tell them all from me 
 i thank them for their tender love care ; 
 and had i not been cite so by them , 
 yet did i purpos as they do entreat ; 
 for sure my thought do hourli prophesi 
 mischanc unto my state by suffolk 's mean . 
 and therefor by hi majesti i swear , 
 whose far unworthi deputi i am , 
 he shall not breath infect in thi air 
 but three day longer , on the pain of death . 
 exit salisburi 
 queen . o henri , let me plead for gentl suffolk ! 
 king henri . ungentl queen , to call him gentl suffolk ! 
 no more , i say ; if thou dost plead for him , 
 thou wilt but add increas unto my wrath . 
 had i but said , i would have kept my word ; 
 but when i swear , it is irrevoc . 
 if after three day ' space thou here be'st found 
 on ani ground that i am ruler of , 
 the world shall not be ransom for thi life . 
 come , warwick , come , good warwick , go with me ; 
 i have great matter to impart to thee . 
 exeunt all but queen and suffolk 
 queen . mischanc and sorrow go along with you ! 
 heart 's discont and sour afflict 
 be playfellow to keep you compani ! 
 there 's two of you ; the devil make a third , 
 and threefold vengeanc tend upon your step ! 
 suffolk . ceas , gentl queen , these execr , 
 and let thi suffolk take hi heavi leav . 
 queen . fie , coward woman and soft-heart wretch , 
 ha thou not spirit to curs thine enemi ? 
 suffolk . a plagu upon them ! wherefor should i curs them ? 
 would curs kill as doth the mandrak 's groan , 
 i would invent as bitter search term , 
 as curst , as harsh , and horribl to hear , 
 deliv 'd strongli through my fix teeth , 
 with full as mani sign of deadli hate , 
 as lean-fac 'd envi in her loathsom cave . 
 my tongu should stumbl in mine earnest word , 
 mine eye should sparkl like the beaten flint , 
 mine hair be fix 'd an end , as one distract ; 
 ay , everi joint should seem to curs and ban ; 
 and even now my burden 'd heart would break , 
 should i not curs them . poison be their drink ! 
 gall , wors than gall , the daintiest that they tast ! 
 their sweetest shade a grove of cypress tree ! 
 their chiefest prospect murd'r basilisk ! 
 their softest touch as smart as lizard ' sting ! 
 their music fright as the serpent 's hiss , 
 and bode screech-owl make the consort full ! 
 all the foul terror in dark-seat hell- 
 queen . enough , sweet suffolk , thou torment'st thyself ; 
 and these dread curs , like the sun 'gainst glass , 
 or like an overcharg gun , recoil , 
 and turn the forc of them upon thyself . 
 suffolk . you bade me ban , and will you bid me leav ? 
 now , by the ground that i am banish 'd from , 
 well could i curs away a winter 's night , 
 though stand nake on a mountain top 
 where bite cold would never let grass grow , 
 and think it but a minut spent in sport . 
 queen . o , let me entreat thee ceas ! give me thi hand , 
 that i may dew it with my mourn tear ; 
 nor let the rain of heaven wet thi place 
 to wash away my woeful monument . 
 o , could thi kiss be print in thi hand , 
 that thou might'st think upon these by the seal , 
 through whom a thousand sigh are breath 'd for thee ! 
 so , get thee gone , that i may know my grief ; 
 't is but surmi 'd while thou art stand by , 
 as one that surfeit think on a want . 
 i will repeal thee or , be well assur 'd , 
 adventur to be banish myself ; 
 and banish i am , if but from thee . 
 go , speak not to me ; even now be gone . 
 o , go not yet ! even thu two friend condemn 'd 
 embrac , and kiss , and take ten thousand leav , 
 loather a hundr time to part than die . 
 yet now , farewel ; and farewel life with thee ! 
 suffolk . thu is poor suffolk ten time banish , 
 onc by the king and three time thrice by thee , 
 't is not the land i care for , wert thou thenc ; 
 a wilder is popul enough , 
 so suffolk had thi heavenli compani ; 
 for where thou art , there is the world itself , 
 with everi sever pleasur in the world ; 
 and where thou art not , desol . 
 i can no more : live thou to joy thi life ; 
 myself no joy in nought but that thou liv'st . 
 
 enter vaux 
 
 queen . whither goe vaux so fast ? what news , i prithe ? 
 vaux . to signifi unto hi majesti 
 that cardin beaufort is at point of death ; 
 for suddenli a grievou sick took him 
 that make him gasp , and stare , and catch the air , 
 blasphem god , and curs men on earth . 
 sometim he talk as if duke humphrey 's ghost 
 were by hi side ; sometim he call the king 
 and whisper to hi pillow , as to him , 
 the secret of hi overcharg soul ; 
 and i am sent to tell hi majesti 
 that even now he cri aloud for him . 
 queen . go tell thi heavi messag to the king . exit vaux 
 ay me ! what is thi world ! what news are these ! 
 but wherefor griev i at an hour 's poor loss , 
 omit suffolk 's exil , my soul 's treasur ? 
 whi onli , suffolk , mourn i not for thee , 
 and with the southern cloud contend in tears- 
 their for the earth 's increas , mine for my sorrow ? 
 now get thee henc : the king , thou know'st , is come ; 
 if thou be found by me ; thou art but dead . 
 suffolk . if i depart from thee i can not live ; 
 and in thi sight to die , what were it els 
 but like a pleasant slumber in thi lap ? 
 here could i breath my soul into the air , 
 as mild and gentl as the cradle-bab 
 die with mother 's dug between it lip ; 
 where , from thi sight , i should be rage mad 
 and cri out for thee to close up mine eye , 
 to have thee with thi lip to stop my mouth ; 
 so shouldst thou either turn my fli soul , 
 or i should breath it so into thi bodi , 
 and then it liv 'd in sweet elysium . 
 to die by thee were but to die in jest : 
 from thee to die were tortur more than death . 
 o , let me stay , befal what may befal ! 
 queen . away ! though part be a fret corros , 
 it is appli to a death wound . 
 to franc , sweet suffolk . let me hear from thee ; 
 for whereso' thou art in thi world 's globe 
 i 'll have an iri that shall find thee out . 
 suffolk . i go . 
 queen . and take my heart with thee . [ she kiss him ] 
 suffolk . a jewel , lock 'd into the woefull'st cask 
 that ever did contain a thing of worth . 
 even as a split bark , so sunder we : 
 thi way fall i to death . 
 queen . thi way for me . exeunt sever 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 london . cardin beaufort 's bedchamb 
 
 enter the king , salisburi , and warwick , to the cardin in bed 
 
 king henri . how fare my lord ? speak , beaufort , to thi sovereign . 
 cardin . if thou be'st death i 'll give thee england 's treasur , 
 enough to purchas such anoth island , 
 so thou wilt let me live and feel no pain . 
 king henri . ah , what a sign it is of evil life 
 where death 's approach is seen so terribl ! 
 warwick . beaufort , it is thi sovereign speak to thee . 
 cardin . bring me unto my trial when you will . 
 die he not in hi bed ? where should he die ? 
 can i make men live , whe'er they will or no ? 
 o , tortur me no more ! i will confess . 
 aliv again ? then show me where he is ; 
 i 'll give a thousand pound to look upon him . 
 he hath no eye , the dust hath blind them . 
 comb down hi hair ; look , look ! it stand upright , 
 like lime-twig set to catch my wing soul ! 
 give me some drink ; and bid the apothecari 
 bring the strong poison that i bought of him . 
 king henri . o thou etern mover of the heaven , 
 look with a gentl eye upon thi wretch ! 
 o , beat away the busi meddl fiend 
 that lay strong sieg unto thi wretch 's soul , 
 and from hi bosom purg thi black despair ! 
 warwick . see how the pang of death do make him grin 
 salisburi . disturb him not , let him pass peaceabl . 
 king henri . peac to hi soul , if god 's good pleasur be ! 
 lord card'nal , if thou think'st on heaven 's bliss , 
 hold up thi hand , make signal of thi hope . 
 he die , and make no sign : o god , forgiv him ! 
 warwick . so bad a death argu a monstrou life . 
 king henri . forbear to judg , for we are sinner all . 
 close up hi eye , and draw the curtain close ; 
 and let us all to medit . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 the coast of kent 
 
 alarum . fight at sea . ordnanc goe off . enter a lieuten , 
 a shipmast and hi mate , and walter whitmor , with sailor ; 
 suffolk and other gentlemen , as prison 
 
 lieuten . the gaudi , blab , and remors day 
 is crept into the bosom of the sea ; 
 and now loud-howl wolv arous the jade 
 that drag the tragic melancholi night ; 
 who with their drowsi , slow , and flag wing 
 clip dead men 's grave , and from their misti jaw 
 breath foul contagi dark in the air . 
 therefor bring forth the soldier of our prize ; 
 for , whilst our pinnac anchor in the down , 
 here shall they make their ransom on the sand , 
 or with their blood stain thi discolour shore . 
 master , thi prison freeli give i thee ; 
 and thou that art hi mate make boot of thi ; 
 the other , walter whitmor , is thi share . 
 first gentleman . what is my ransom , master , let me know ? 
 master . a thousand crown , or els lay down your head . 
 mate . and so much shall you give , or off goe your . 
 lieuten . what , think you much to pay two thousand crown , 
 and bear the name and port of gentlemen ? 
 cut both the villain ' throats- for die you shall ; 
 the live of those which we have lost in fight 
 be counterpoi 'd with such a petti sum ! 
 first gentleman . i 'll give it , sir : and therefor spare my life . 
 second gentleman . and so will i , and write home for it straight . 
 whitmor . i lost mine eye in lay the prize aboard , 
 [ to suffolk ] and therefor , to reveng it , shalt thou die ; 
 and so should these , if i might have my will . 
 lieuten . be not so rash ; take ransom , let him live . 
 suffolk . look on my georg , i am a gentleman : 
 rate me at what thou wilt , thou shalt be paid . 
 whitmor . and so am i : my name is walter whitmor . 
 how now ! whi start'st thou ? what , doth death affright ? 
 suffolk . thi name affright me , in whose sound is death . 
 a cun man did calcul my birth 
 and told me that by water i should die ; 
 yet let not thi make thee be bloody-mind ; 
 thi name is gualtier , be rightli sound . 
 whitmor . gualtier or walter , which it is i care not : 
 never yet did base dishonour blur our name 
 but with our sword we wip 'd away the blot ; 
 therefor , when merchant-lik i sell reveng , 
 broke be my sword , my arm torn and defac 'd , 
 and i proclaim 'd a coward through the world . 
 suffolk . stay , whitmor , for thi prison is a princ , 
 the duke of suffolk , william de la pole . 
 whitmor . the duke of suffolk muffl up in rag ? 
 suffolk . ay , but these rag are no part of the duke : 
 jove sometim went disgui 'd , and whi not i ? 
 lieuten . but jove wa never slain , as thou shalt be . 
 suffolk . obscur and lowli swain , king henri 's blood , 
 the honour blood of lancast , 
 must not be shed by such a jade groom . 
 hast thou not kiss 'd thi hand and held my stirrup , 
 barehead plod by my foot-cloth mule , 
 and thought thee happi when i shook my head ? 
 how often hast thou wait at my cup , 
 fed from my trencher , kneel 'd down at the board , 
 when i have feast with queen margaret ? 
 rememb it , and let it make thee crestfall'n , 
 ay , and allay thu thi abort pride , 
 how in our voiding-lobbi hast thou stood 
 and duli wait for my come forth . 
 thi hand of mine hath writ in thi behalf , 
 and therefor shall it charm thi riotou tongu . 
 whitmor . speak , captain , shall i stab the forlorn swain ? 
 lieuten . first let my word stab him , as he hath me . 
 suffolk . base slave , thi word are blunt , and so art thou . 
 lieuten . convey him henc , and on our longboat 's side 
 strike off hi head . 
 suffolk . thou dar'st not , for thi own . 
 lieuten . pool ! 
 suffolk . pool ? 
 lieuten . ay , kennel , puddl , sink , whose filth and dirt 
 troubl the silver spring where england drink ; 
 now will i dam up thi thi yawn mouth 
 for swallow the treasur of the realm . 
 thi lip , that kiss 'd the queen , shall sweep the ground ; 
 and thou that smil'dst at good duke humphrey 's death 
 against the senseless wind shalt grin in vain , 
 who in contempt shall hiss at thee again ; 
 and wed be thou to the hag of hell 
 for dare to affi a mighti lord 
 unto the daughter of a worthless king , 
 have neither subject , wealth , nor diadem . 
 by devilish polici art thou grown great , 
 and , like ambiti sylla , overgorg 'd 
 with gobbet of thi mother 's bleed heart . 
 by thee anjou and main were sold to franc ; 
 the fals revolt norman thorough thee 
 disdain to call us lord ; and picardi 
 hath slain their governor , surpri 'd our fort , 
 and sent the rag soldier wound home . 
 the princ warwick , and the nevil all , 
 whose dread sword were never drawn in vain , 
 as hate thee , are rise up in arm ; 
 and now the hous of york- thrust from the crown 
 by shame murder of a guiltless king 
 and lofti proud encroach tyranny- 
 burn with reveng fire , whose hope colour 
 advanc our half-fac 'd sun , strive to shine , 
 under the which is writ 'inviti nubibu . ' 
 the common here in kent are up in arm ; 
 and to conclud , reproach and beggari 
 is crept into the palac of our king , 
 and all by thee . away ! convey him henc . 
 suffolk . o that i were a god , to shoot forth thunder 
 upon these paltri , servil , abject drudg ! 
 small thing make base men proud : thi villain here , 
 be captain of a pinnac , threaten more 
 than bargulu , the strong illyrian pirat . 
 drone suck not eagl ' blood but rob beehiv . 
 it is imposs that i should die 
 by such a lowli vassal as thyself . 
 thi word move rage and not remors in me . 
 i go of messag from the queen to franc : 
 i charg thee waft me safe cross the channel . 
 lieuten . walter- 
 whitmor . come , suffolk , i must waft thee to thi death . 
 suffolk . gelidu timor occupat artu : it is thee i fear . 
 whitmor . thou shalt have caus to fear befor i leav thee . 
 what , are ye daunt now ? now will ye stoop ? 
 first gentleman . my graciou lord , entreat him , speak him fair . 
 suffolk . suffolk 's imperi tongu is stem and rough , 
 us 'd to command , untaught to plead for favour . 
 far be it we should honour such as these 
 with humbl suit : no , rather let my head 
 stoop to the block than these knee bow to ani 
 save to the god of heaven and to my king ; 
 and sooner danc upon a bloodi pole 
 than stand uncov 'd to the vulgar groom . 
 true nobil is exempt from fear : 
 more can i bear than you dare execut . 
 lieuten . hale him away , and let him talk no more . 
 suffolk . come , soldier , show what cruelti ye can , 
 that thi my death may never be forgot- 
 great men oft die by vile bezonian : 
 a roman sworder and banditto slave 
 murder 'd sweet tulli ; brutu ' bastard hand 
 stabb 'd juliu caesar ; savag island 
 pompey the great ; and suffolk die by pirat . 
 exit walter with suffolk 
 lieuten . and as for these , whose ransom we have set , 
 it is our pleasur one of them depart ; 
 therefor come you with us , and let him go . 
 exeunt all but the first gentleman 
 
 re-ent whitmor with suffolk 's bodi 
 
 whitmor . there let hi head and lifeless bodi lie , 
 until the queen hi mistress buri it . exit 
 first gentleman . o barbar and bloodi spectacl ! 
 hi bodi will i bear unto the king . 
 if he reveng it not , yet will hi friend ; 
 so will the queen , that live held him dear . 
 exit with the bodi 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 blackheath 
 
 enter georg bevi and john holland 
 
 georg . come and get thee a sword , though made of a lath ; they have 
 been up these two day . 
 john . they have the more need to sleep now , then . 
 georg . i tell thee jack cade the clothier mean to dress the 
 commonwealth , and turn it , and set a new nap upon it . 
 john . so he had need , for 't is threadbar . well , i say it wa never 
 merri world in england sinc gentlemen came up . 
 georg . o miser age ! virtu is not regard in handicraftsmen . 
 john . the nobil think scorn to go in leather apron . 
 georg . nay , more , the king 's council are no good workmen . 
 john . true ; and yet it is said 'labour in thi vocat ' ; which is 
 as much to say as 'let the magistr be labour men ' ; and 
 therefor should we be magistr . 
 georg . thou hast hit it ; for there 's no better sign of a brave 
 mind than a hard hand . 
 john . i see them ! i see them ! there 's best 's son , the tanner of 
 wingham- 
 georg . he shall have the skin of our enemi to make dog 's 
 leather of . 
 john . and dick the butcher- 
 georg . then is sin struck down , like an ox , and iniqu 's throat 
 cut like a calf . 
 john . and smith the weaver- 
 georg . argo , their thread of life is spun . 
 john . come , come , let 's fall in with them . 
 
 drum . enter cade , dick the butcher , smith 
 the weaver , and a sawyer , with infinit number 
 
 cade . we john cade , so term 'd of our suppos father- 
 dick . [ asid ] or rather , of steal a cade of her . 
 cade . for our enemi shall fall befor us , inspir with the 
 spirit of put down king and princes- command silenc . 
 dick . silenc ! 
 cade . my father wa a mortimer- 
 dick . [ asid ] he wa an honest man and a good bricklay . 
 cade . my mother a plantagenet- 
 dick . [ asid ] i knew her well ; she wa a midwif . 
 cade . my wife descend of the lacies- 
 dick . [ asid ] she wa , inde , a pedlar 's daughter , and sold mani 
 lace . 
 smith . [ asid ] but now of late , not abl to travel with her furr 'd 
 pack , she wash buck here at home . 
 cade . therefor am i of an honour hous . 
 dick . [ asid ] ay , by my faith , the field is honour , and there 
 wa he born , under a hedg , for hi father had never a hous but 
 the cage . 
 cade . valiant i am . 
 smith . [ asid ] ' a must need ; for beggari is valiant . 
 cade . i am abl to endur much . 
 dick . [ asid ] no question of that ; for i have seen him whipt three 
 market day togeth . 
 cade . i fear neither sword nor fire . 
 smith . [ asid ] he need not fear the sword , for hi coat is of 
 proof . 
 dick . [ asid ] but methink he should stand in fear of fire , be 
 burnt i ' th ' hand for steal of sheep . 
 cade . be brave , then , for your captain is brave , and vow 
 reform . there shall be in england seven halfpenni loav 
 sold for a penni ; the three-hoop 'd pot shall have ten hoop ; and 
 i will make it feloni to drink small beer . all the realm shall be 
 in common , and in cheapsid shall my palfrey go to grass . and 
 when i am king- as king i will be 
 all . god save your majesti ! 
 cade . i thank you , good people- there shall be no money ; all shall 
 eat and drink on my score , and i will apparel them all in one 
 liveri , that they may agre like brother and worship me their 
 lord . 
 dick . the first thing we do , let 's kill all the lawyer . 
 cade . nay , that i mean to do . is not thi a lament thing , that 
 of the skin of an innoc lamb should be made parchment ? that 
 parchment , be scribbl 'd o'er , should undo a man ? some say the 
 bee sting ; but i say 't is the bee 's wax ; for i did but seal onc 
 to a thing , and i wa never mine own man sinc . how now ! who 's 
 there ? 
 
 enter some , bring in the clerk of chatham 
 
 smith . the clerk of chatham . he can write and read and cast 
 accompt . 
 cade . o monstrou ! 
 smith . we took him set of boy ' copi . 
 cade . here 's a villain ! 
 smith . ha a book in hi pocket with red letter i n't . 
 cade . nay , then he is a conjur . 
 dick . nay , he can make oblig and write court-hand . 
 cade . i am sorri for't ; the man is a proper man , of mine honour ; 
 unless i find him guilti , he shall not die . come hither , sirrah , 
 i must examin thee . what is thi name ? 
 clerk . emmanuel . 
 dick . they use to write it on the top of letter ; 'twill go hard 
 with you . 
 cade . let me alon . dost thou use to write thi name , or hast thou a 
 mark to thyself , like a honest plain-deal man ? 
 clerk . sir , i thank god , i have been so well brought up that i can 
 write my name . 
 all . he hath confess 'd . away with him ! he 's a villain and a 
 traitor . 
 cade . away with him , i say ! hang him with hi pen and inkhorn about 
 hi neck . exit one with the clerk 
 
 enter michael 
 
 michael . where 's our gener ? 
 cade . here i am , thou particular fellow . 
 michael . fli , fli , fli ! sir humphrey stafford and hi brother are 
 hard by , with the king 's forc . 
 cade . stand , villain , stand , or i 'll fell thee down . he shall be 
 encount'r with a man as good as himself . he is but a knight , 
 is ' a ? 
 michael . no . 
 cade . to equal him , i will make myself a knight present . 
 [ kneel ] rise up , sir john mortim . [ rise ] now have at him ! 
 
 enter sir humphrey stafford and william 
 hi brother , with drum and soldier 
 
 stafford . rebelli hind , the filth and scum of kent , 
 mark 'd for the gallow , lay your weapon down ; 
 home to your cottag , forsak thi groom ; 
 the king is merci if you revolt . 
 william stafford . but angri , wrath , and inclin 'd to blood , 
 if you go forward ; therefor yield or die . 
 cade . as for these silken-co slave , i pass not ; 
 it is to you , good peopl , that i speak , 
 o'er whom , in time to come , i hope to reign ; 
 for i am right heir unto the crown . 
 stafford . villain , thi father wa a plaster ; 
 and thou thyself a shearman , art thou not ? 
 cade . and adam wa a garden . 
 william stafford . and what of that ? 
 cade . marri , thi : edmund mortim , earl of march , 
 marri the duke of clarenc ' daughter , did he not ? 
 stafford . ay , sir . 
 cade . by her he had two children at one birth . 
 william stafford . that 's fals . 
 cade . ay , there 's the question ; but i say 't is true . 
 the elder of them be put to nurs , 
 wa by a beggar-woman stol'n away , 
 and , ignor of hi birth and parentag , 
 becam a bricklay when he came to age . 
 hi son am i ; deni it if you can . 
 dick . nay , 't is too true ; therefor he shall be king . 
 smith . sir , he made a chimney in my father 's hous , and the brick 
 are aliv at thi day to testifi it ; therefor deni it not . 
 stafford . and will you credit thi base drudg 's word 
 that speak he know not what ? 
 all . ay , marri , will we ; therefor get ye gone . 
 william stafford . jack cade , the duke of york hath taught you thi . 
 cade . [ asid ] he lie , for i invent it myself- go to , sirrah , 
 tell the king from me that for hi father 's sake , henri the 
 fifth , in whose time boy went to span-count for french crown , 
 i am content he shall reign ; but i 'll be protector over him . 
 dick . and furthermor , we 'll have the lord say 's head for sell 
 the dukedom of main . 
 cade . and good reason ; for therebi is england main 'd and fain to go 
 with a staff , but that my puissanc hold it up . fellow king , i 
 tell you that that lord say hath geld the commonwealth and made 
 it an eunuch ; and more than that , he can speak french , and 
 therefor he is a traitor . 
 stafford . o gross and miser ignor ! 
 cade . nay , answer if you can ; the frenchmen are our enemi . go to , 
 then , i ask but thi : can he that speak with the tongu of an 
 enemi be a good counsellor , or no ? 
 all . no , no ; and therefor we 'll have hi head . 
 william stafford . well , see gentl word will not prevail , 
 assail them with the armi of the king . 
 stafford . herald , away ; and throughout everi town 
 proclaim them traitor that are up with cade ; 
 that those which fli befor the battl end 
 may , even in their wives'and children 's sight , 
 be hang 'd up for exampl at their door . 
 and you that be the king 's friend , follow me . 
 exeunt the two stafford and soldier 
 cade . and you that love the common follow me . 
 now show yourselv men ; 't is for liberti . 
 we will not leav one lord , one gentleman ; 
 spare none but such as go in clout shoon , 
 for they are thrifti honest men and such 
 as would- but that they dare not- take our part . 
 dick . they are all in order , and march toward us . 
 cade . but then are we in order when we are most out of order . come , 
 march forward . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 anoth part of blackheath 
 
 alarum to the fight , wherein both the stafford are slain . 
 enter cade and the rest 
 
 cade . where 's dick , the butcher of ashford ? 
 dick . here , sir . 
 cade . they fell befor thee like sheep and oxen , and thou behavedst 
 thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughter-hous ; 
 therefor thu will i reward thee- the lent shall be as long 
 again as it is , and thou shalt have a licenc to kill for a 
 hundr lack one . 
 dick . i desir no more . 
 cade . and , to speak truth , thou deserv'st no less . [ put on sir 
 humphrey 's brigandin ] thi monument of the victori will i bear , 
 and the bodi shall be drag at my hors heel till i do come 
 to london , where we will have the mayor 's sword born befor us . 
 dick . if we mean to thrive and do good , break open the gaol and 
 let out the prison . 
 cade . fear not that , i warrant thee . come , let 's march toward 
 london . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 london . the palac 
 
 enter the king with a supplic , and the queen with suffolk 's head ; 
 the duke of buckingham , and the lord say 
 
 queen . oft have i heard that grief soften the mind 
 and make it fear and degener ; 
 think therefor on reveng and ceas to weep . 
 but who can ceas to weep , and look on thi ? 
 here may hi head lie on my throb breast ; 
 but where 's the bodi that i should embrac ? 
 buckingham . what answer make your grace to the rebel ' 
 supplic ? 
 king henri . i 'll send some holi bishop to entreat ; 
 for god forbid so mani simpl soul 
 should perish by the sword ! and i myself , 
 rather than bloodi war shall cut them short , 
 will parley with jack cade their gener . 
 but stay , i 'll read it over onc again . 
 queen . ah , barbar villain ! hath thi love face 
 rul 'd like a wander planet over me , 
 and could it not enforc them to relent 
 that were unworthi to behold the same ? 
 king henri . lord say , jack cade hath sworn to have thi head . 
 say . ay , but i hope your high shall have hi . 
 king henri . how now , madam ! 
 still lament and mourn for suffolk 's death ? 
 i fear me , love , if that i had been dead , 
 thou wouldst not have mourn 'd so much for me . 
 queen . no , my love , i should not mourn , but die for thee . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 king henri . how now ! what news ? whi com'st thou in such hast ? 
 messeng . the rebel are in southwark ; fli , my lord ! 
 jack cade proclaim himself lord mortim , 
 descend from the duke of clarenc ' hous , 
 and call your grace usurp , openli , 
 and vow to crown himself in westminst . 
 hi armi is a rag multitud 
 of hind and peasant , rude and merciless ; 
 sir humphrey stafford and hi brother 's death 
 hath given them heart and courag to proceed . 
 all scholar , lawyer , courtier , gentlemen , 
 they call fals caterpillar and intend their death . 
 king henri . o graceless men ! they know not what they do . 
 buckingham . my graciou lord , retir to killingworth 
 until a power be rai 'd to put them down . 
 queen . ah , were the duke of suffolk now aliv , 
 these kentish rebel would be soon appea 'd ! 
 king henri . lord say , the traitor hate thee ; 
 therefor away with us to killingworth . 
 say . so might your grace 's person be in danger . 
 the sight of me is odiou in their eye ; 
 and therefor in thi citi will i stay 
 and live alon as secret as i may . 
 
 enter anoth messeng 
 
 second messeng . jack cade hath gotten london bridg . 
 the citizen fli and forsak their hous ; 
 the rascal peopl , thirst after prey , 
 join with the traitor ; and they jointli swear 
 to spoil the citi and your royal court . 
 buckingham . then linger not , my lord ; away , take hors . 
 king henri . come margaret ; god , our hope , will succour us . 
 queen . my hope is gone , now suffolk is decea 'd . 
 king henri . [ to lord say ] farewel , my lord , trust not the kentish 
 rebel . 
 buckingham . trust nobodi , for fear you be betray 'd . 
 say . the trust i have is in mine innoc , 
 and therefor am i bold and resolut . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 london . the tower 
 
 enter lord scale upon the tower , walk . then enter two or three citizen , 
 below 
 
 scale . how now ! is jack cade slain ? 
 first citizen . no , my lord , nor like to be slain ; for they have 
 won the bridg , kill all those that withstand them . 
 the lord mayor crave aid of your honour from the 
 tower , to defend the citi from the rebel . 
 scale . such aid as i can spare you shall command , 
 but i am troubl here with them myself ; 
 the rebel have assay 'd to win the tower . 
 but get you to smithfield , and gather head , 
 and thither i will send you matthew goff ; 
 fight for your king , your countri , and your live ; 
 and so , farewel , for i must henc again . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 london . cannon street 
 
 enter jack cade and the rest , and strike hi staff on london stone 
 
 cade . now is mortim lord of thi citi . and here , sit upon 
 london stone , i charg and command that , of the citi 's cost , the 
 piss conduit run noth but claret wine thi first year of 
 our reign . and now henceforward it shall be treason for ani that 
 call me other than lord mortim . 
 
 enter a soldier , run 
 
 soldier . jack cade ! jack cade ! 
 cade . knock him down there . [ they kill him ] 
 smith . if thi fellow be wise , he 'll never call ye jack cade more ; 
 i think he hath a veri fair warn . 
 dick . my lord , there 's an armi gather togeth in smithfield . 
 cade . come then , let 's go fight with them . but first go and set 
 london bridg on fire ; and , if you can , burn down the tower too . 
 come , let 's away . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene vii . 
 london . smithfield 
 
 alarum . matthew goff is slain , and all the rest . then enter jack cade , 
 with hi compani 
 
 cade . so , sir . now go some and pull down the savoy ; other to th ' 
 inn of court ; down with them all . 
 dick . i have a suit unto your lordship . 
 cade . be it a lordship , thou shalt have it for that word . 
 dick . onli that the law of england may come out of your mouth . 
 john . [ asid ] mass , 'twill be sore law then ; for he wa thrust in 
 the mouth with a spear , and 't is not whole yet . 
 smith . [ asid ] nay , john , it will be stink law ; for hi breath 
 stink with eat toast chees . 
 cade . i have thought upon it ; it shall be so . away , burn all the 
 record of the realm . my mouth shall be the parliament of 
 england . 
 john . [ asid ] then we are like to have bite statut , unless hi 
 teeth be pull 'd out . 
 cade . and henceforward all thing shall be in common . 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . my lord , a prize , a prize ! here 's the lord say , which 
 sold the town in franc ; he that made us pay one and twenti 
 fifteen , and one shine to the pound , the last subsidi . 
 
 enter georg bevi , with the lord say 
 
 cade . well , he shall be behead for it ten time . ah , thou say , 
 thou serg , nay , thou buckram lord ! now art thou within point 
 blank of our jurisdict regal . what canst thou answer to my 
 majesti for give up of normandi unto mounsieur basimecu the 
 dauphin of franc ? be it known unto thee by these presenc , even 
 the presenc of lord mortim , that i am the besom that must 
 sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art . thou hast most 
 traitor corrupt the youth of the realm in erect a 
 grammar school ; and wherea , befor , our forefath had no other 
 book but the score and the talli , thou hast caus print to 
 be us 'd , and , contrari to the king , hi crown , and digniti , thou 
 hast built a paper-mil . it will be prove to thi face that thou 
 hast men about thee that usual talk of a noun and a verb , and 
 such abomin word as no christian ear can endur to hear . 
 thou hast appoint justic of peac , to call poor men befor 
 them about matter they were not abl to answer . moreov , thou 
 hast put them in prison , and becaus they could not read , thou 
 hast hang 'd them , when , inde , onli for that caus they have 
 been most worthi to live . thou dost ride in a foot-cloth , dost 
 thou not ? 
 say . what of that ? 
 cade . marri , thou ought'st not to let thi hors wear a cloak , when 
 honest men than thou go in their hose and doublet . 
 dick . and work in their shirt too , as myself , for exampl , that am 
 a butcher . 
 say . you men of kent- 
 dick . what say you of kent ? 
 say . noth but thi : 't is 'bona terra , mala gen . ' 
 cade . away with him , away with him ! he speak latin . 
 say . hear me but speak , and bear me where you will . 
 kent , in the commentari caesar writ , 
 is term 'd the civil'st place of all thi isl . 
 sweet is the countri , becaus full of rich ; 
 the peopl liber valiant , activ , wealthi ; 
 which make me hope you are not void of piti . 
 i sold not main , i lost not normandi ; 
 yet , to recov them , would lose my life . 
 justic with favour have i alway done ; 
 pray'r and tear have mov 'd me , gift could never . 
 when have i aught exact at your hand , 
 but to maintain the king , the realm , and you ? 
 larg gift have i bestow 'd on learn clerk , 
 becaus my book preferr 'd me to the king , 
 and see ignor is the curs of god , 
 knowledg the wing wherewith we fli to heaven , 
 unless you be possess 'd with devilish spirit 
 you can not but forbear to murder me . 
 thi tongu hath parley 'd unto foreign king 
 for your behoof . 
 cade . tut , when struck'st thou one blow in the field ? 
 say . great men have reach hand . oft have i struck 
 those that i never saw , and struck them dead . 
 georg . o monstrou coward ! what , to come behind folk ? 
 say . these cheek are pale for watch for your good . 
 cade . give him a box o ' th ' ear , and that will make 'em red again . 
 say . long sit to determin poor men 's caus 
 hath made me full of sick and diseas . 
 cade . ye shall have a hempen caudl then , and the help of hatchet . 
 dick . whi dost thou quiver , man ? 
 say . the palsi , and not fear , provok me . 
 cade . nay , he nod at us , as who should say ' i 'll be even with 
 you ' ; i 'll see if hi head will stand steadier on a pole , or no . 
 take him away , and behead him . 
 say . tell me : wherein have i offend most ? 
 have i affect wealth or honour ? speak . 
 are my chest fill 'd up with extort gold ? 
 is my apparel sumptuou to behold ? 
 whom have i injur 'd , that ye seek my death ? 
 these hand are free from guiltless bloodshed , 
 thi breast from harbour foul deceit thought . 
 o , let me live ! 
 cade . [ asid ] i feel remors in myself with hi word ; but i 'll 
 bridl it . he shall die , an it be but for plead so well for 
 hi life.- away with him ! he ha a familiar under hi tongu ; he 
 speak not o ' god 's name . go , take him away , i say , and strike 
 off hi head present , and then break into hi son-in-law 's 
 hous , sir jame cromer , and strike off hi head , and bring them 
 both upon two pole hither . 
 all . it shall be done . 
 say . ah , countrymen ! if when you make your pray'r , 
 god should be so obdur as yourselv , 
 how would it fare with your depart soul ? 
 and therefor yet relent and save my life . 
 cade . away with him , and do as i command ye . [ exeunt some with 
 lord say ] the proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head 
 on hi shoulder , unless he pay me tribut ; there shall not a 
 maid be marri , but she shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they 
 have it . men shall hold of me in capit ; and we charg and 
 command that their wive be as free as heart can wish or tongu 
 can tell . 
 dick . my lord , when shall we go to cheapsid , and take up 
 commod upon our bill ? 
 cade . marri , present . 
 all . o , brave ! 
 
 re-ent one with the head 
 
 cade . but is not thi braver ? let them kiss one anoth , for they 
 lov 'd well when they were aliv . now part them again , lest they 
 consult about the give up of some more town in franc . 
 soldier , defer the spoil of the citi until night ; for with these 
 born befor us instead of mace will we ride through the 
 street , and at everi corner have them kiss . away ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene viii . 
 southwark 
 
 alarum and retreat . enter again cade and all hi rabblement 
 
 cade . up fish street ! down saint magnu ' corner ! kill and knock 
 down ! throw them into thame ! [ sound a parley ] 
 what nois is thi i hear ? dare ani be so bold to sound retreat 
 or parley when i command them kill ? 
 
 enter buckingham and old clifford , attend 
 
 buckingham . ay , here they be that dare and will disturb thee . 
 and therefor yet relent , and save my life . 
 know , cade , we come ambassador from the king 
 unto the common whom thou hast misl ; 
 and here pronounc free pardon to them all 
 that will forsak thee and go home in peac . 
 clifford . what say ye , countrymen ? will ye relent 
 and yield to merci whilst 't is offer 'd you , 
 or let a rebel lead you to your death ? 
 who love the king , and will embrac hi pardon , 
 fling up hi cap and say 'god save hi majesti ! ' 
 who hateth him and honour not hi father , 
 henri the fifth , that made all franc to quak , 
 shake he hi weapon at us and pass by . 
 all . god save the king ! god save the king ! 
 cade . what , buckingham and clifford , are ye so brave ? 
 and you , base peasant , do ye believ him ? will you need be 
 hang 'd with your about your neck ? hath my sword therefor broke 
 through london gate , that you should leav me at the white hart 
 in southwark ? i thought ye would never have given out these arm 
 till you had recov your ancient freedom . but you are all 
 recreant and dastard , and delight to live in slaveri to the 
 nobil . let them break your back with burden , take your 
 hous over your head , ravish your wive and daughter befor 
 your face . for me , i will make shift for one ; and so god 's curs 
 light upon you all ! 
 all . we 'll follow cade , we 'll follow cade ! 
 clifford . is cade the son of henri the fifth , 
 that thu you do exclaim you 'll go with him ? 
 will he conduct you through the heart of franc , 
 and make the meanest of you earl and duke ? 
 ala , he hath no home , no place to fli to ; 
 nor know he how to live but by the spoil , 
 unless by rob of your friend and us . 
 were't not a shame that whilst you live at jar 
 the fear french , whom you late vanquish , 
 should make a start o'er sea and vanquish you ? 
 methink alreadi in thi civil broil 
 i see them lord it in london street , 
 cri 'villiago ! ' unto all they meet . 
 better ten thousand base-born cade miscarri 
 than you should stoop unto a frenchman 's merci . 
 to franc , to franc , and get what you have lost ; 
 spare england , for it is your nativ coast . 
 henri hath money ; you are strong and manli . 
 god on our side , doubt not of victori . 
 all . a clifford ! a clifford ! we 'll follow the king and clifford . 
 cade . wa ever feather so lightli blown to and fro as thi 
 multitud ? the name of henri the fifth hale them to an hundr 
 mischief , and make them leav me desol . i see them lay their 
 head togeth to surpris me . my sword make way for me for here 
 is no stay . in despit of the devil and hell , have through 
 the veri middest of you ! and heaven and honour be wit that 
 no want of resolut in me , but onli my follow ' base and 
 ignomini treason , make me betak me to my heel . 
 exit 
 buckingham . what , is he fled ? go some , and follow him ; 
 and he that bring hi head unto the king 
 shall have a thousand crown for hi reward . 
 exeunt some of them 
 follow me , soldier ; we 'll devis a mean 
 to reconcil you all unto the king . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ix . 
 kill , worth castl 
 
 sound trumpet . enter king , queen , and somerset , on the terrac 
 
 king henri . wa ever king that joy 'd an earthli throne 
 and could command no more content than i ? 
 no sooner wa i crept out of my cradl 
 but i wa made a king , at nine month old . 
 wa never subject long 'd to be a king 
 as i do long and wish to be a subject . 
 
 enter buckingham and old clifford 
 
 buckingham . health and glad tide to your majesti ! 
 king henri . whi , buckingham , is the traitor cade surpri 'd ? 
 or is he but retir 'd to make him strong ? 
 
 enter , below , multitud , with halter about their neck 
 
 clifford . he is fled , my lord , and all hi power do yield , 
 and humbl thu , with halter on their neck , 
 expect your high ' doom of life or death . 
 king henri . then , heaven , set ope thi everlast gate , 
 to entertain my vow of thank and prais ! 
 soldier , thi day have you redeem 'd your live , 
 and show 'd how well you love your princ and countri . 
 continu still in thi so good a mind , 
 and henri , though he be infortun , 
 assur yourselv , will never be unkind . 
 and so , with thank and pardon to you all , 
 i do dismiss you to your sever countri . 
 all . god save the king ! god save the king ! 
 
 enter a messeng 
 
 messeng . pleas it your grace to be advertis 
 the duke of york is newli come from ireland 
 and with a puissant and a mighti power 
 of gallowglass and stout kern 
 is march hitherward in proud array , 
 and still proclaimeth , as he come along , 
 hi arm are onli to remov from thee 
 the duke of somerset , whom he term a traitor . 
 king henri . thu stand my state , 'twixt cade and york distress 'd ; 
 like to a ship that , have scap 'd a tempest , 
 is straightway calm 'd , and board with a pirat ; 
 but now is cade driven back , hi men disper 'd , 
 and now is york in arm to second him . 
 i pray thee , buckingham , go and meet him 
 and ask him what 's the reason of these arm . 
 tell him i 'll send duke edmund to the tower- 
 and somerset , we will commit thee thither 
 until hi armi be dismiss 'd from him . 
 somerset . my lord , 
 i 'll yield myself to prison willingli , 
 or unto death , to do my countri good . 
 king henri . in ani case be not too rough in term , 
 for he is fierc and can not brook hard languag . 
 buckingham . i will , my lord , and doubt not so to deal 
 as all thing shall redound unto your good . 
 king henri . come , wife , let 's in , and learn to govern better ; 
 for yet may england curs my wretch reign . 
 flourish . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene x . 
 kent . iden 's garden 
 
 enter cade 
 
 cade . fie on ambit ! fie on myself , that have a sword and yet am 
 readi to famish ! these five day have i hid me in these wood and 
 durst not peep out , for all the countri is laid for me ; but now 
 am i so hungri that , if i might have a leas of my life for a 
 thousand year , i could stay no longer . wherefor , on a brick 
 wall have i climb 'd into thi garden , to see if i can eat grass 
 or pick a sallet anoth while , which is not amiss to cool a 
 man 's stomach thi hot weather . and i think thi word 'sallet ' 
 wa born to do me good ; for mani a time , but for a sallet , my 
 brain-pain had been cleft with a brown bill ; and mani a time , 
 when i have been dri , and brave march , it hath serv 'd me 
 instead of a quart-pot to drink in ; and now the word 'sallet ' 
 must serv me to feed on . 
 
 enter iden 
 
 iden . lord , who would live turmoil in the court 
 and may enjoy such quiet walk as these ? 
 thi small inherit my father left me 
 contenteth me , and worth a monarchi . 
 i seek not to wax great by other ' wane 
 or gather wealth i care not with what envi ; 
 sufficeth that i have maintain my state , 
 and send the poor well pleas from my gate . 
 cade . here 's the lord of the soil come to seiz me for a stray , for 
 enter hi fee-simpl without leav . ah , villain , thou wilt 
 betray me , and get a thousand crown of the king by carri my 
 head to him ; but i 'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich and 
 swallow my sword like a great pin ere thou and i part . 
 iden . whi , rude companion , whatsoe' thou be , 
 i know thee not ; whi then should i betray thee ? 
 is't not enough to break into my garden 
 and like a thief to come to rob my ground , 
 climb my wall in spite of me the owner , 
 but thou wilt brave me with these sauci term ? 
 cade . brave thee ? ay , by the best blood that ever wa broach 'd , and 
 beard thee too . look on me well : i have eat no meat these five 
 day , yet come thou and thi five men and if i do not leav you 
 all as dead as a door-nail , i pray god i may never eat grass 
 more . 
 iden . nay , it shall ne'er be said , while england stand , 
 that alexand iden , an esquir of kent , 
 took odd to combat a poor famish 'd man . 
 oppos thi steadfast-gaz eye to mine ; 
 see if thou canst outfac me with thi look ; 
 set limb to limb , and thou art far the lesser ; 
 thi hand is but a finger to my fist , 
 thi leg a stick compar with thi truncheon ; 
 my foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast , 
 and if mine arm be heav in the air , 
 thi grave is digg 'd alreadi in the earth . 
 as for word , whose great answer word , 
 let thi my sword report what speech forbear . 
 cade . by my valour , the most complet champion that ever i heard ! 
 steel , if thou turn the edg , or cut not out the burli bon 'd 
 clown in chine of beef ere thou sleep in thi sheath , i beseech 
 god on my knee thou mayst be turn 'd to hobnail . [ here they 
 fight ; cade fall ] o , i am slain ! famin and no other hath slain 
 me . let ten thousand devil come against me , and give me but the 
 ten meal i have lost , and i 'd defi them all . wither , garden , and 
 be henceforth a buri place to all that do dwell in thi hous , 
 becaus the unconqu soul of cade is fled . 
 iden . is't cade that i have slain , that monstrou traitor ? 
 sword , i will hallow thee for thi thi deed 
 and hang thee o'er my tomb when i am dead . 
 ne'er shall thi blood be wipe from thi point , 
 but thou shalt wear it as a herald 's coat 
 to emblaz the honour that thi master got . 
 cade . iden , farewel ; and be proud of thi victori . tell kent from 
 me she hath lost her best man , and exhort all the world to be 
 coward ; for i , that never fear ani , am vanquish by famin , 
 not by valour . [ die ] 
 iden . how much thou wrong'st me , heaven be my judg . 
 die , damn wretch , the curs of her that bare thee ! 
 and as i thrust thi bodi in with my sword , 
 so wish i , i might thrust thi soul to hell . 
 henc will i drag thee headlong by the heel 
 unto a dunghil , which shall be thi grave , 
 and there cut off thi most ungraci head , 
 which i will bear in triumph to the king , 
 leav thi trunk for crow to feed upon . exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 field between dartford and blackheath 
 
 enter york , and hi armi of irish , with drum and colour 
 
 york . from ireland thu come york to claim hi right 
 and pluck the crown from feebl henri 's head : 
 ring bell aloud , burn bonfir clear and bright , 
 to entertain great england 's law king . 
 ah , sancta majesta ! who would not buy thee dear ? 
 let them obey that know not how to rule ; 
 thi hand wa made to handl nought but gold . 
 i can not give due action to my word 
 except a sword or sceptr balanc it . 
 a sceptr shall it have , have i a soul 
 on which i 'll toss the flower-de-luc of franc . 
 
 enter buckingham 
 
 [ asid ] whom have we here ? buckingham , to disturb me ? 
 the king hath sent him , sure : i must dissembl . 
 buckingham . york , if thou meanest well i greet thee well . 
 york . humphrey of buckingham , i accept thi greet . 
 art thou a messeng , or come of pleasur ? 
 buckingham . a messeng from henri , our dread lieg , 
 to know the reason of these arm in peac ; 
 or whi thou , be a subject as i am , 
 against thi oath and true allegi sworn , 
 should rais so great a power without hi leav , 
 or dare to bring thi forc so near the court . 
 york . [ asid ] scarc can i speak , my choler is so great . 
 o , i could hew up rock and fight with flint , 
 i am so angri at these abject term ; 
 and now , like ajax telamoniu , 
 on sheep or oxen could i spend my furi . 
 i am far better born than is the king , 
 more like a king , more kingli in my thought ; 
 but i must make fair weather yet awhil , 
 till henri be more weak and i more strong.- 
 buckingham , i prithe , pardon me 
 that i have given no answer all thi while ; 
 my mind wa troubl with deep melancholi . 
 the caus whi i have brought thi armi hither 
 is to remov proud somerset from the king , 
 sediti to hi grace and to the state . 
 buckingham . that is too much presumpt on thi part ; 
 but if thi arm be to no other end , 
 the king hath yield unto thi demand : 
 the duke of somerset is in the tower . 
 york . upon thine honour , is he prison ? 
 buckingham . upon mine honour , he is prison . 
 york . then , buckingham , i do dismiss my pow'r . 
 soldier , i thank you all ; dispers yourselv ; 
 meet me to-morrow in saint georg 's field , 
 you shall have pay and everyth you wish . 
 and let my sovereign , virtuou henri , 
 command my eldest son , nay , all my son , 
 as pledg of my fealti and love . 
 i 'll send them all as will as i live : 
 land , good , hors , armour , anyth i have , 
 is hi to use , so somerset may die . 
 buckingham . york , i commend thi kind submiss . 
 we twain will go into hi high ' tent . 
 
 enter the king , and attend 
 
 king henri . buckingham , doth york intend no harm to us , 
 that thu he marcheth with thee arm in arm ? 
 york . in all submiss and humil 
 york doth present himself unto your high . 
 king henri . then what intend these forc thou dost bring ? 
 york . to heav the traitor somerset from henc , 
 and fight against that monstrou rebel cade , 
 who sinc i heard to be discomfit . 
 
 enter iden , with cade 's head 
 
 iden . if one so rude and of so mean condit 
 may pass into the presenc of a king , 
 lo , i present your grace a traitor 's head , 
 the head of cade , whom i in combat slew . 
 king henri . the head of cade ! great god , how just art thou ! 
 o , let me view hi visag , be dead , 
 that live wrought me such exceed troubl . 
 tell me , my friend , art thou the man that slew him ? 
 iden . i wa , a n't like your majesti . 
 king henri . how art thou call 'd ? and what is thi degre ? 
 iden . alexand iden , that 's my name ; 
 a poor esquir of kent that love hi king . 
 buckingham . so pleas it you , my lord , 'twere not amiss 
 he were creat knight for hi good servic . 
 king henri . iden , kneel down . [ he kneel ] rise up a knight . 
 we give thee for reward a thousand mark , 
 and will that thou thenceforth attend on us . 
 iden . may iden live to merit such a bounti , 
 and never live but true unto hi lieg ! 
 
 enter the queen and somerset 
 
 king henri . see , buckingham ! somerset come with th ' queen : 
 go , bid her hide him quickli from the duke . 
 queen . for thousand york he shall not hide hi head , 
 but boldli stand and front him to hi face . 
 york . how now ! is somerset at liberti ? 
 then , york , unloos thi long-imprison thought 
 and let thi tongu be equal with thi heart . 
 shall i endur the sight of somerset ? 
 fals king , whi hast thou broken faith with me , 
 know how hardli i can brook abus ? 
 king did i call thee ? no , thou art not king ; 
 not fit to govern and rule multitud , 
 which dar'st not , no , nor canst not rule a traitor . 
 that head of thine doth not becom a crown ; 
 thi hand is made to grasp a palmer 's staff , 
 and not to grace an aw princ sceptr . 
 that gold must round engirt these brow of mine , 
 whose smile and frown , like to achil ' spear , 
 is abl with the chang to kill and cure . 
 here is a hand to hold a sceptr up , 
 and with the same to act control law . 
 give place . by heaven , thou shalt rule no more 
 o'er him whom heaven creat for thi ruler . 
 somerset . o monstrou traitor ! i arrest thee , york , 
 of capit treason 'gainst the king and crown . 
 obey , audaci traitor ; kneel for grace . 
 york . wouldst have me kneel ? first let me ask of these , 
 if they can brook i bow a knee to man . 
 sirrah , call in my son to be my bail : exit attend 
 i know , ere thi will have me go to ward , 
 they 'll pawn their sword for my enfranchis . 
 queen . call hither clifford ; bid him come amain , 
 to say if that the bastard boy of york 
 shall be the sureti for their traitor father . 
 exit buckingham 
 york . o blood-bespot neapolitan , 
 outcast of napl , england 's bloodi scourg ! 
 the son of york , thi better in their birth , 
 shall be their father 's bail ; and bane to those 
 that for my sureti will refus the boy ! 
 
 enter edward and richard plantagenet 
 
 see where they come : i 'll warrant they 'll make it good . 
 
 enter clifford and hi son 
 
 queen . and here come clifford to deni their bail . 
 clifford . health and all happi to my lord the king ! 
 [ kneel ] 
 york . i thank thee , clifford . say , what news with thee ? 
 nay , do not fright us with an angri look . 
 we are thi sovereign , clifford , kneel again ; 
 for thi mistak so , we pardon thee . 
 clifford . thi is my king , york , i do not mistak ; 
 but thou mistak me much to think i do . 
 to bedlam with him ! is the man grown mad ? 
 king henri . ay , clifford ; a bedlam and ambiti humour 
 make him oppos himself against hi king . 
 clifford . he is a traitor ; let him to the tower , 
 and chop away that factiou pate of hi . 
 queen . he is arrest , but will not obey ; 
 hi son , he say , shall give their word for him . 
 york . will you not , son ? 
 edward . ay , nobl father , if our word will serv . 
 richard . and if word will not , then our weapon shall . 
 clifford . whi , what a brood of traitor have we here ! 
 york . look in a glass , and call thi imag so : 
 i am thi king , and thou a false-heart traitor . 
 call hither to the stake my two brave bear , 
 that with the veri shake of their chain 
 they may astonish these fell-lurk cur . 
 bid salisburi and warwick come to me . 
 
 enter the earl of warwick and salisburi 
 
 clifford . are these thi bear ? we 'll bait thi bear to death , 
 and manacl the berard in their chain , 
 if thou dar'st bring them to the baiting-plac . 
 richard . oft have i seen a hot o'er ween cur 
 run back and bite , becaus he wa withheld ; 
 who , be suffer 'd , with the bear 's fell paw , 
 hath clapp 'd hi tail between hi leg and cri ; 
 and such a piec of servic will you do , 
 if you oppos yourselv to match lord warwick . 
 clifford . henc , heap of wrath , foul indigest lump , 
 as crook in thi manner as thi shape ! 
 york . nay , we shall heat you thoroughli anon . 
 clifford . take heed , lest by your heat you burn yourselv . 
 king henri . whi , warwick , hath thi knee forgot to bow ? 
 old salisburi , shame to thi silver hair , 
 thou mad mislead of thi brainsick son ! 
 what , wilt thou on thi death-b play the ruffian 
 and seek for sorrow with thi spectacl ? 
 o , where is faith ? o , where is loyalti ? 
 if it be banish 'd from the frosti head , 
 where shall it find a harbour in the earth ? 
 wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war 
 and shame thine honour age with blood ? 
 whi art thou old , and want'st experi ? 
 or wherefor dost abus it , if thou hast it ? 
 for shame ! in duti bend thi knee to me , 
 that bow unto the grave with mickl age . 
 salisburi . my lord , i have consid with myself 
 the tide of thi most renown duke , 
 and in my conscienc do reput hi grace 
 the right heir to england 's royal seat . 
 king henri . hast thou not sworn allegi unto me ? 
 salisburi . i have . 
 king henri . canst thou dispens with heaven for such an oath ? 
 salisburi . it is great sin to swear unto a sin ; 
 but greater sin to keep a sin oath . 
 who can be bound by ani solemn vow 
 to do a murd'rou deed , to rob a man , 
 to forc a spotless virgin 's chastiti , 
 to reav the orphan of hi patrimoni , 
 to wring the widow from her custom 'd right , 
 and have no other reason for thi wrong 
 but that he wa bound by a solemn oath ? 
 queen . a subtl traitor need no sophist . 
 king henri . call buckingham , and bid him arm himself . 
 york . call buckingham , and all the friend thou hast , 
 i am resolv 'd for death or digniti . 
 clifford . the first i warrant thee , if dream prove true . 
 warwick . you were best to go to bed and dream again 
 to keep thee from the tempest of the field . 
 clifford . i am resolv 'd to bear a greater storm 
 than ani thou canst conjur up to-day ; 
 and that i 'll write upon thi burgonet , 
 might i but know thee by thi household badg . 
 warwick . now , by my father 's badg , old nevil 's crest , 
 the rampant bear chain 'd to the rag staff , 
 thi day i 'll wear aloft my burgonet , 
 as on a mountain-top the cedar show , 
 that keep hi leav in spite of ani storm , 
 even to affright thee with the view thereof . 
 clifford . and from thi burgonet i 'll rend thi bear 
 and tread it under foot with all contempt , 
 despit the berard that protect the bear . 
 young clifford . and so to arm , victori father , 
 to quell the rebel and their complic . 
 richard . fie ! chariti , for shame ! speak not in spite , 
 for you shall sup with jesu christ to-night . 
 young clifford . foul stigmat , that 's more than thou canst tell . 
 richard . if not in heaven , you 'll sure sup in hell . 
 exeunt sever 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 saint alban 
 
 alarum to the battl . enter warwick 
 
 warwick . clifford of cumberland , 't is warwick call ; 
 and if thou dost not hide thee from the bear , 
 now , when the angri trumpet sound alarum 
 and dead men 's cri do fill the empti air , 
 clifford , i say , come forth and fight with me . 
 proud northern lord , clifford of cumberland , 
 warwick is hoars with call thee to arm . 
 
 enter york 
 
 how now , my nobl lord ! what , all a-foot ? 
 york . the deadly-hand clifford slew my steed ; 
 but match to match i have encount'r him , 
 and made a prey for carrion kite and crow 
 even of the bonni beast he lov 'd so well . 
 
 enter old clifford 
 
 warwick . of one or both of us the time is come . 
 york . hold , warwick , seek thee out some other chase , 
 for i myself must hunt thi deer to death . 
 warwick . then , nobli , york ; 't is for a crown thou fight'st . 
 as i intend , clifford , to thrive to-day , 
 it griev my soul to leav thee unassail 'd . exit 
 clifford . what seest thou in me , york ? whi dost thou paus ? 
 york . with thi brave bear should i be in love 
 but that thou art so fast mine enemi . 
 clifford . nor should thi prowess want prais and esteem 
 but that 't is shown ignobl and in treason . 
 york . so let it help me now against thi sword , 
 as i in justic and true right express it ! 
 clifford . my soul and bodi on the action both ! 
 york . a dread lay ! address thee instantli . 
 [ they fight and clifford fall ] 
 clifford . la fin couronn le oeuvr . [ die ] 
 york . thu war hath given thee peac , for thou art still . 
 peac with hi soul , heaven , if it be thi will ! exit 
 
 enter young clifford 
 
 young clifford . shame and confus ! all is on the rout ; 
 fear frame disord , and disord wound 
 where it should guard . o war , thou son of hell , 
 whom angri heaven do make their minist , 
 throw in the frozen bosom of our part 
 hot coal of vengeanc ! let no soldier fli . 
 he that is truli dedic to war 
 hath no self-lov ; nor he that love himself 
 hath not essenti , but by circumst , 
 the name of valour . [ see hi father 's bodi ] 
 o , let the vile world end 
 and the premis flame of the last day 
 knit earth and heaven togeth ! 
 now let the gener trumpet blow hi blast , 
 particular and petti sound 
 to ceas ! wast thou ordain 'd , dear father , 
 to lose thi youth in peac and to achiev 
 the silver liveri of advis age , 
 and in thi rever and thi chair-day thu 
 to die in ruffian battl ? even at thi sight 
 my heart is turn 'd to stone ; and while 't is mine 
 it shall be stoni . york not our old men spare ; 
 no more will i their babe . tear virgin 
 shall be to me even as the dew to fire ; 
 and beauti , that the tyrant oft reclaim , 
 shall to my flame wrath be oil and flax . 
 henceforth i will not have to do with piti : 
 meet i an infant of the hous of york , 
 into as mani gobbet will i cut it 
 as wild medea young absyrtu did ; 
 in cruelti will i seek out my fame . 
 come , thou new ruin of old clifford 's hous ; 
 as did aenea old anchis bear , 
 so bear i thee upon my manli shoulder ; 
 but then aenea bare a live load , 
 noth so heavi as these woe of mine . 
 exit with the bodi 
 
 enter richard and somerset to fight . somerset is kill 
 
 richard . so , lie thou there ; 
 for underneath an alehous ' paltri sign , 
 the castl in saint alban , somerset 
 hath made the wizard famou in hi death . 
 sword , hold thi temper ; heart , be wrath still : 
 priest pray for enemi , but princ kill . exit 
 
 fight . excurs . enter king , queen , and other 
 
 queen . away , my lord ! you are slow ; for shame , away ! 
 king henri . can we outrun the heaven ? good margaret , stay . 
 queen . what are you made of ? you 'll nor fight nor fli . 
 now is it manhood , wisdom , and defenc , 
 to give the enemi way , and to secur us 
 by what we can , which can no more but fli . 
 [ alarum afar off ] 
 if you be ta'en , we then should see the bottom 
 of all our fortun ; but if we hapli scape- 
 as well we may , if not through your neglect- 
 we shall to london get , where you are lov 'd , 
 and where thi breach now in our fortun made 
 may readili be stopp 'd . 
 
 re-ent young clifford 
 
 young clifford . but that my heart 's on futur mischief set , 
 i would speak blasphemi ere bid you fli ; 
 but fli you must ; uncur discomfit 
 reign in the heart of all our present part . 
 away , for your relief ! and we will live 
 to see their day and them our fortun give . 
 away , my lord , away ! exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 field near saint alban 
 
 alarum . retreat . enter york , richard , warwick , and soldier , 
 with drum and colour 
 
 york . of salisburi , who can report of him , 
 that winter lion , who in rage forget 
 age contus and all brush of time 
 and , like a gallant in the brow of youth , 
 repair him with occas ? thi happi day 
 is not itself , nor have we won one foot , 
 if salisburi be lost . 
 richard . my nobl father , 
 three time to-day i holp him to hi hors , 
 three time bestrid him , thrice i led him off , 
 persuad him from ani further act ; 
 but still where danger wa , still there i met him ; 
 and like rich hang in a home hous , 
 so wa hi will in hi old feebl bodi . 
 but , nobl as he is , look where he come . 
 
 enter salisburi 
 
 salisburi . now , by my sword , well hast thou fought to-day ! 
 by th ' mass , so did we all . i thank you , richard : 
 god know how long it is i have to live , 
 and it hath plea 'd him that three time to-day 
 you have defend me from immin death . 
 well , lord , we have not got that which we have ; 
 't is not enough our foe are thi time fled , 
 be opposit of such repair natur . 
 york . i know our safeti is to follow them ; 
 for , as i hear , the king is fled to london 
 to call a present court of parliament . 
 let us pursu him ere the writ go forth . 
 what say lord warwick ? shall we after them ? 
 warwick . after them ? nay , befor them , if we can . 
 now , by my faith , lord , 't wa a gloriou day : 
 saint alban ' battl , won by famou york , 
 shall be eterniz 'd in all age to come . 
 sound drum and trumpet and to london all ; 
 and more such day as these to us befal ! exeunt 
 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the third part of king henri the sixth 
 
 < stop >
 
 
 
 dramati persona 
 
 timon of athen 
 
 luciu 
 lucullu 
 semproniu 
 flatter lord 
 
 ventidiu , one of timon 's fals friend 
 alcibiad , an athenian captain 
 apemantu , a churlish philosoph 
 flaviu , steward to timon 
 
 flaminiu 
 luciliu 
 serviliu 
 timon 's servant 
 
 caphi 
 philotu 
 titu 
 hortensiu 
 servant to timon 's creditor 
 
 poet 
 painter 
 jewel 
 merchant 
 mercer 
 an old athenian 
 three stranger 
 a page 
 a fool 
 
 phrynia 
 timandra 
 mistress to alcibiad 
 
 cupid 
 amazon 
 in the masqu 
 
 lord , senat , offic , soldier , servant , thiev , and 
 attend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 scene : 
 athen and the neighbour wood 
 
 
 act i. scene i . 
 athen . timon 's hous 
 
 enter poet , painter , jewel , merchant , and mercer , at sever door 
 
 poet . good day , sir . 
 painter . i am glad y'are well . 
 poet . i have not seen you long ; how goe the world ? 
 painter . it wear , sir , as it grow . 
 poet . ay , that 's well known . 
 but what particular rariti ? what strang , 
 which manifold record not match ? see , 
 magic of bounti , all these spirit thi power 
 hath conjur 'd to attend ! i know the merchant . 
 painter . i know them both ; th ' other 's a jewel . 
 merchant . o , 't is a worthi lord ! 
 jewel . nay , that 's most fix 'd . 
 merchant . a most incompar man ; breath 'd , as it were , 
 to an untir and continu good . 
 he pass . 
 jewel . i have a jewel here- 
 merchant . o , pray let 's see't . for the lord timon , sir ? 
 jewel . if he will touch the estim . but for that- 
 poet . when we for recompens have prai 'd the vile , 
 it stain the glori in that happi vers 
 which aptli sing the good . 
 merchant . [ look at the jewel ] 't is a good form . 
 jewel . and rich . here is a water , look ye . 
 painter . you are rapt , sir , in some work , some dedic 
 to the great lord . 
 poet . a thing slipp 'd idli from me . 
 our poesi is as a gum , which ooz 
 from whenc 't is nourish 'd . the fire i ' th ' flint 
 show not till it be struck : our gentl flame 
 provok itself , and like the current fli 
 each bound it chafe . what have you there ? 
 painter . a pictur , sir . when come your book forth ? 
 poet . upon the heel of my present , sir . 
 let 's see your piec . 
 painter . 't is a good piec . 
 poet . so 't is ; thi come off well and excel . 
 painter . indiffer . 
 poet . admir . how thi grace 
 speak hi own stand ! what a mental power 
 thi eye shoot forth ! how big imagin 
 move in thi lip ! to th ' dumb of the gestur 
 one might interpret . 
 painter . it is a pretti mock of the life . 
 here is a touch ; is't good ? 
 poet . i will say of it 
 it tutor natur . artifici strife 
 live in these touch , liveli than life . 
 
 enter certain senat , and pass over 
 
 painter . how thi lord is follow ! 
 poet . the senat of athens- happi man ! 
 painter . look , moe ! 
 poet . you see thi confluenc , thi great flood of visitor . 
 i have in thi rough work shap 'd out a man 
 whom thi beneath world doth embrac and hug 
 with amplest entertain . my free drift 
 halt not particularli , but move itself 
 in a wide sea of tax . no level 'd malic 
 infect one comma in the cours i hold , 
 but fli an eagl flight , bold and forth on , 
 leav no tract behind . 
 painter . how shall i understand you ? 
 poet . i will unbolt to you . 
 you see how all condit , how all minds- 
 as well of glib and slipp'ri creatur as 
 of grave and auster qualiti , tender down 
 their servic to lord timon . hi larg fortun , 
 upon hi good and graciou natur hang , 
 subdu and properti to hi love and tendanc 
 all sort of heart ; yea , from the glass-fac 'd flatter 
 to apemantu , that few thing love better 
 than to abhor himself ; even he drop down 
 the knee befor him , and return in peac 
 most rich in timon 's nod . 
 painter . i saw them speak togeth . 
 poet . sir , i have upon a high and pleasant hill 
 feign 'd fortun to be thron 'd . the base o ' th ' mount 
 is rank 'd with all desert , all kind of natur 
 that labour on the bosom of thi sphere 
 to propag their state . amongst them all 
 whose eye are on thi sovereign ladi fix 'd 
 one do i person of lord timon 's frame , 
 whom fortun with her ivori hand waft to her ; 
 whose present grace to present slave and servant 
 translat hi rival . 
 painter . 't is conceiv 'd to scope . 
 thi throne , thi fortun , and thi hill , methink , 
 with one man beckon 'd from the rest below , 
 bow hi head against the steepi mount 
 to climb hi happi , would be well express 'd 
 in our condit . 
 poet . nay , sir , but hear me on . 
 all those which were hi fellow but of late- 
 some better than hi value- on the moment 
 follow hi stride , hi lobbi fill with tendanc , 
 rain sacrifici whisper in hi ear , 
 make sacr even hi stirrup , and through him 
 drink the free air . 
 painter . ay , marri , what of these ? 
 poet . when fortun in her shift and chang of mood 
 spurn down her late belov , all hi depend , 
 which labour 'd after him to the mountain 's top 
 even on their knee and hand , let him slip down , 
 not one accompani hi declin foot . 
 painter . 't is common . 
 a thousand moral paint i can show 
 that shall demonstr these quick blow of fortun 's 
 more pregnantli than word . yet you do well 
 to show lord timon that mean eye have seen 
 the foot abov the head . 
 
 trumpet sound . enter timon , address himself 
 courteous to everi suitor , a messeng from 
 ventidiu talk with him ; luciliu and other 
 servant follow 
 
 timon . imprison 'd is he , say you ? 
 messeng . ay , my good lord . five talent is hi debt ; 
 hi mean most short , hi creditor most strait . 
 your honour letter he desir 
 to those have shut him up ; which fail , 
 period hi comfort . 
 timon . nobl ventidiu ! well . 
 i am not of that feather to shake of 
 my friend when he must need me . i do know him 
 a gentleman that well deserv a help , 
 which he shall have . i 'll pay the debt , and free him . 
 messeng . your lordship ever bind him . 
 timon . commend me to him ; i will send hi ransom ; 
 and be enfranchi 'd , bid him come to me . 
 't is not enough to help the feebl up , 
 but to support him after . fare you well . 
 messeng . all happi to your honour ! exit 
 
 enter an old athenian 
 
 old athenian . lord timon , hear me speak . 
 timon . freeli , good father . 
 old athenian . thou hast a servant nam 'd luciliu . 
 timon . i have so ; what of him ? 
 old athenian . most nobl timon , call the man befor thee . 
 timon . attend he here , or no ? luciliu ! 
 luciliu . here , at your lordship 's servic . 
 old athenian . thi fellow here , lord timon , thi thi creatur , 
 by night frequent my hous . i am a man 
 that from my first have been inclin 'd to thrift , 
 and my estat deserv an heir more rai 'd 
 than one which hold a trencher . 
 timon . well ; what further ? 
 old athenian . one onli daughter have i , no kin els , 
 on whom i may confer what i have got . 
 the maid is fair , o ' th ' youngest for a bride , 
 and i have bred her at my dearest cost 
 in qualiti of the best . thi man of thine 
 attempt her love ; i prithe , nobl lord , 
 join with me to forbid him her resort ; 
 myself have spoke in vain . 
 timon . the man is honest . 
 old athenian . therefor he will be , timon . 
 hi honesti reward him in itself ; 
 it must not bear my daughter . 
 timon . doe she love him ? 
 old athenian . she is young and apt : 
 our own preced passion do instruct us 
 what leviti 's in youth . 
 timon . love you the maid ? 
 luciliu . ay , my good lord , and she accept of it . 
 old athenian . if in her marriag my consent be miss , 
 i call the god to wit i will choos 
 mine heir from forth the beggar of the world , 
 and dispossess her all . 
 timon . how shall she be endow 'd , 
 if she be mate with an equal husband ? 
 old athenian . three talent on the present ; in futur , all . 
 timon . thi gentleman of mine hath serv 'd me long ; . 
 to build hi fortun i will strain a littl , 
 for 't is a bond in men . give him thi daughter : 
 what you bestow , in him i 'll counterpois , 
 and make him weigh with her . 
 old athenian . most nobl lord , 
 pawn me to thi your honour , she is hi . 
 timon . my hand to thee ; mine honour on my promis . 
 luciliu . humbl i thank your lordship . never may 
 that state or fortun fall into my keep 
 which is not owe to you ! 
 exeunt luciliu and old athenian 
 poet . [ present hi poem ] vouchsaf my labour , and long live your 
 lordship ! 
 timon . i thank you ; you shall hear from me anon ; 
 go not away . what have you there , my friend ? 
 painter . a piec of paint , which i do beseech 
 your lordship to accept . 
 timon . paint is welcom . 
 the paint is almost the natur man ; 
 for sinc dishonour traffic with man 's natur , 
 he is but outsid ; these pencil 'd figur are 
 even such as they give out . i like your work , 
 and you shall find i like it ; wait attend 
 till you hear further from me . 
 painter . the god preserv ye ! 
 timon . well fare you , gentleman . give me your hand ; 
 we must need dine togeth . sir , your jewel 
 hath suffer under prais . 
 jewel . what , my lord ! disprais ? 
 timon . a mere satieti of commend ; 
 if i should pay you for't as 't is extol 'd , 
 it would unclew me quit . 
 jewel . my lord , 't is rate 
 as those which sell would give ; but you well know 
 thing of like valu , differ in the owner , 
 are prize by their master . believe't , dear lord , 
 you mend the jewel by the wear it . 
 timon . well mock 'd . 
 
 enter apemantu 
 
 merchant . no , my good lord ; he speak the common tongu , 
 which all men speak with him . 
 timon . look who come here ; will you be chid ? 
 jewel . we 'll bear , with your lordship . 
 merchant . he 'll spare none . 
 timon . good morrow to thee , gentl apemantu ! 
 apemantu . till i be gentl , stay thou for thi good morrow ; 
 when thou art timon 's dog , and these knave honest . 
 timon . whi dost thou call them knave ? thou know'st them not . 
 apemantu . are they not athenian ? 
 timon . ye . 
 apemantu . then i repent not . 
 jewel . you know me , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . thou know'st i do ; i call 'd thee by thi name . 
 timon . thou art proud , apemantu . 
 apemantu . of noth so much as that i am not like timon . 
 timon . whither art go ? 
 apemantu . to knock out an honest athenian 's brain . 
 timon . that 's a deed thou't die for . 
 apemantu . right , if do noth be death by th ' law . 
 timon . how lik'st thou thi pictur , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . the best , for the innoc . 
 timon . wrought he not well that paint it ? 
 apemantu . he wrought better that made the painter ; and yet he 's 
 but a filthi piec of work . 
 painter . y'are a dog . 
 apemantu . thi mother 's of my gener ; what 's she , if i be a dog ? 
 timon . wilt dine with me , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . no ; i eat not lord . 
 timon . an thou shouldst , thou'dst anger ladi . 
 apemantu . o , they eat lord ; so they come by great belli . 
 timon . that 's a lascivi apprehens . 
 apemantu . so thou apprehend'st it take it for thi labour . 
 timon . how dost thou like thi jewel , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . not so well as plain deal , which will not cost a man 
 a doit . 
 timon . what dost thou think 't is worth ? 
 apemantu . not worth my think . how now , poet ! 
 poet . how now , philosoph ! 
 apemantu . thou liest . 
 poet . art not one ? 
 apemantu . ye . 
 poet . then i lie not . 
 apemantu . art not a poet ? 
 poet . ye . 
 apemantu . then thou liest . look in thi last work , where thou hast 
 feign 'd him a worthi fellow . 
 poet . that 's not feign'd- he is so . 
 apemantu . ye , he is worthi of thee , and to pay thee for thi 
 labour . he that love to be flatter is worthi o ' th ' flatter . 
 heaven , that i were a lord ! 
 timon . what wouldst do then , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . e'en as apemantu doe now : hate a lord with my heart . 
 timon . what , thyself ? 
 apemantu . ay . 
 timon . wherefor ? 
 apemantu . that i had no angri wit to be a lord.- art not thou a 
 merchant ? 
 merchant . ay , apemantu . 
 apemantu . traffic confound thee , if the god will not ! 
 merchant . if traffic do it , the god do it . 
 apemantu . traffic 's thi god , and thi god confound thee ! 
 
 trumpet sound . enter a messeng 
 
 timon . what trumpet 's that ? 
 messeng . 't is alcibiad , and some twenti hors , 
 all of companionship . 
 timon . pray entertain them ; give them guid to us . 
 exeunt some attend 
 you must need dine with me . go not you henc 
 till i have thank 'd you . when dinner 's done 
 show me thi piec . i am joy of your sight . 
 
 enter alcibiad , with the rest 
 
 most welcom , sir ! [ they salut ] 
 apemantu . so , so , there ! 
 ach contract and starv your suppl joint ! 
 that there should be small love amongst these sweet knave , 
 and all thi courtesi ! the strain of man 's bred out 
 into baboon and monkey . 
 alcibiad . sir , you have sav 'd my long , and i feed 
 most hungerli on your sight . 
 timon . right welcom , sir ! 
 ere we depart we 'll share a bounteou time 
 in differ pleasur . pray you , let us in . 
 exeunt all but apemantu 
 
 enter two lord 
 
 first lord . what time o ' day is't , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . time to be honest . 
 first lord . that time serv still . 
 apemantu . the more accurs thou that still omit'st it . 
 second lord . thou art go to lord timon 's feast . 
 apemantu . ay ; to see meat fill knave and wine heat fool . 
 second lord . fare thee well , fare thee well . 
 apemantu . thou art a fool to bid me farewel twice . 
 second lord . whi , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . shouldst have kept one to thyself , for i mean to give 
 thee none . 
 first lord . hang thyself . 
 apemantu . no , i will do noth at thi bid ; make thi request 
 to thi friend . 
 second lord . away , unpeac dog , or i 'll spurn thee henc . 
 apemantu . i will fli , like a dog , the heel o ' th ' ass . exit 
 first lord . he 's opposit to human . come , shall we in 
 and tast lord timon 's bounti ? he outgo 
 the veri heart of kind . 
 second lord . he pour it out : plutu , the god of gold , 
 is but hi steward ; no meed but he repay 
 sevenfold abov itself ; no gift to him 
 but breed the giver a return exceed 
 all use of quittanc . 
 first lord . the noblest mind he carri 
 that ever govern 'd man . 
 second lord . long may he live in fortun ! shall we in ? 
 first lord . i 'll keep you compani . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a room of state in timon 's hous 
 
 hautboy play loud music . a great banquet serv 'd in ; 
 flaviu and other attend ; and then enter lord timon , the state , 
 the athenian lord , ventidiu , which timon redeem 'd from prison . 
 then come , drop after all , apemantu , discontentedli , like himself 
 
 ventidiu . most honour timon , 
 it hath plea 'd the god to rememb my father 's age , 
 and call him to long peac . 
 he is gone happi , and ha left me rich . 
 then , as in grate virtu i am bound 
 to your free heart , i do return those talent , 
 doubl with thank and servic , from whose help 
 i deriv 'd liberti . 
 timon . o , by no mean , 
 honest ventidiu ! you mistak my love ; 
 i gave it freeli ever ; and there 's none 
 can truli say he give , if he receiv . 
 if our better play at that game , we must not dare 
 to imit them : fault that are rich are fair . 
 ventidiu . a nobl spirit ! 
 timon . nay , my lord , ceremoni wa but devi 'd at first 
 to set a gloss on faint deed , hollow welcom , 
 recant good , sorri ere 't is shown ; 
 but where there is true friendship there need none . 
 pray , sit ; more welcom are ye to my fortun 
 than my fortun to me . [ they sit ] 
 first lord . my lord , we alway have confess 'd it . 
 apemantu . ho , ho , confess 'd it ! hang 'd it , have you not ? 
 timon . o , apemantu , you are welcom . 
 apemantu . no ; 
 you shall not make me welcom . 
 i come to have thee thrust me out of door . 
 timon . fie , th'art a churl ; ye have got a humour there 
 doe not becom a man ; 't is much to blame . 
 they say , my lord , ira furor brevi est ; but yond man is ever 
 angri . go , let him have a tabl by himself ; for he doe neither 
 affect compani nor is he fit for't inde . 
 apemantu . let me stay at thine apperil , timon . 
 i come to observ ; i give thee warn o n't . 
 timon . i take no heed of thee . th'art an athenian , therefor 
 welcom . i myself would have no power ; prithe let my meat make 
 thee silent . 
 apemantu . i scorn thi meat ; 't'would choke me , for i should ne'er 
 flatter thee . o you god , what a number of men eat timon , and he 
 see 'em not ! it griev me to see so mani dip their meat in one 
 man 's blood ; and all the mad is , he cheer them up too . 
 i wonder men dare trust themselv with men . 
 methink they should invit them without knive : 
 good for their meat and safer for their live . 
 there 's much exampl for't ; the fellow that sit next him now , 
 part bread with him , pledg the breath of him in a divid 
 draught , is the readiest man to kill him . 't ha been prove . if 
 i were a huge man i should fear to drink at meal . 
 lest they should spi my windpip 's danger note : 
 great men should drink with har on their throat . 
 timon . my lord , in heart ! and let the health go round . 
 second lord . let it flow thi way , my good lord . 
 apemantu . flow thi way ! a brave fellow ! he keep hi tide well . 
 those health will make thee and thi state look ill , timon . 
 here 's that which is too weak to be a sinner , honest water , which 
 ne'er left man i ' th ' mire . 
 thi and my food are equal ; there 's no odd . ' 
 feast are too proud to give thank to the god . 
 
 apemantu ' grace 
 
 immort god , i crave no pelf ; 
 i pray for no man but myself . 
 grant i may never prove so fond 
 to trust man on hi oath or bond , 
 or a harlot for her weep , 
 or a dog that seem a-sleep , 
 or a keeper with my freedom , 
 or my friend , if i should need 'em . 
 amen . so fall to't . 
 rich men sin , and i eat root . [ eat and drink ] 
 
 much good dich thi good heart , apemantu ! 
 timon . captain alcibiad , your heart 's in the field now . 
 alcibiad . my heart is ever at your servic , my lord . 
 timon . you had rather be at a breakfast of enemi than dinner of 
 friend . 
 alcibiad . so they were bleed new , my lord , there 's no meat 
 like 'em ; i could wish my best friend at such a feast . 
 apemantu . would all those flatter were thine enemi then , that 
 then thou mightst kill 'em , and bid me to 'em . 
 first lord . might we but have that happi , my lord , that you 
 would onc use our heart , wherebi we might express some part of 
 our zeal , we should think ourselv for ever perfect . 
 timon . o , no doubt , my good friend , but the god themselv have 
 provid that i shall have much help from you . how had you been 
 my friend els ? whi have you that charit titl from 
 thousand , did not you chiefli belong to my heart ? i have told 
 more of you to myself than you can with modesti speak in your own 
 behalf ; and thu far i confirm you . o you god , think i , what 
 need we have ani friend if we should ne'er have need of 'em ? 
 they were the most needless creatur live , should we ne'er 
 have use for 'em ; and would most resembl sweet instrument hung 
 up in case , that keep their sound to themselv . whi , i have 
 often wish 'd myself poorer , that i might come nearer to you . we 
 are born to do benefit ; and what better or proper can we call 
 our own than the rich of our friend ? o , what a preciou 
 comfort 't is to have so mani like brother command one 
 anoth 's fortun ! o , joy 's e'en made away ere't can be born ! 
 mine eye can not hold out water , methink . to forget their 
 fault , i drink to you . 
 apemantu . thou weep'st to make them drink , timon . 
 second lord . joy had the like concept in our eye , 
 and at that instant like a babe sprung up . 
 apemantu . ho , ho ! i laugh to think that babe a bastard . 
 third lord . i promis you , my lord , you mov 'd me much . 
 apemantu . much ! [ sound tucket ] 
 timon . what mean that trump ? 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 how now ? 
 servant . pleas you , my lord , there are certain ladi most 
 desir of admitt . 
 timon . ladi ! what are their will ? 
 servant . there come with them a forerunn , my lord , which bear 
 that offic to signifi their pleasur . 
 timon . i pray let them be admit . 
 
 enter cupid 
 cupid . hail to thee , worthi timon , and to all 
 that of hi bounti tast ! the five best sens 
 acknowledg thee their patron , and come freeli 
 to gratul thi plenteou bosom . th ' ear , 
 tast , touch , smell , plea 'd from thi tabl rise ; 
 they onli now come but to feast thine eye . 
 timon . they 're welcom all ; let 'em have kind admitt . 
 music , make their welcom . exit cupid 
 first lord . you see , my lord , how ampl y'are belov 'd . 
 
 music . re-ent cupid , witb a masqu of ladi as amazon , 
 with lute in their hand , danc and play 
 
 apemantu . hoy-day , what a sweep of vaniti come thi way ! 
 they danc ? they are mad women . 
 like mad is the glori of thi life , 
 as thi pomp show to a littl oil and root . 
 we make ourselv fool to disport ourselv , 
 and spend our flatteri to drink those men 
 upon whose age we void it up again 
 with poison spite and envi . 
 who live that 's not deprav or deprav ? 
 who die that bear not one spurn to their grave 
 of their friend ' gift ? 
 i should fear those that danc befor me now 
 would one day stamp upon me . 't ha been done : 
 men shut their door against a set sun . 
 
 the lord rise from tabl , with much ador of 
 timon ; and to show their love , each singl out an 
 amazon , and all danc , men witb women , a lofti 
 strain or two to the hautboy , and ceas 
 
 timon . you have done our pleasur much grace , fair ladi , 
 set a fair fashion on our entertain , 
 which wa not half so beauti and kind ; 
 you have ad worth unto't and lustr , 
 and entertain 'd me with mine own devic ; 
 i am to thank you for't . 
 first ladi . my lord , you take us even at the best . 
 apemantu . faith , for the worst is filthi , and would not hold 
 take , i doubt me . 
 timon . ladi , there is an idl banquet attend you ; 
 pleas you to dispos yourselv . 
 all ladi . most thank , my lord . 
 exeunt cupid and ladi 
 timon . flaviu ! 
 flaviu . my lord ? 
 timon . the littl casket bring me hither . 
 flaviu . ye , my lord . [ asid ] more jewel yet ! 
 there is no cross him in 's humour , 
 els i should tell him- well i ' faith , i should- 
 when all 's spent , he 'd be cross 'd then , an he could . 
 't is piti bounti had not eye behind , 
 that man might ne'er be wretch for hi mind . exit 
 first lord . where be our men ? 
 servant . here , my lord , in readi . 
 second lord . our hors ! 
 
 re-ent flaviu , with the casket 
 
 timon . o my friend , 
 i have one word to say to you . look you , my good lord , 
 i must entreat you honour me so much 
 as to advanc thi jewel ; accept it and wear it , 
 kind my lord . 
 first lord . i am so far alreadi in your gifts- 
 all . so are we all . 
 
 enter a servant 
 
 servant . my lord , there are certain nobl of the senat newli 
 alight and come to visit you . 
 timon . they are fairli welcom . exit servant 
 flaviu . i beseech your honour , vouchsaf me a word ; it doe 
 concern you near . 
 timon . near ! whi then , anoth time i 'll hear thee . i prithe let 's 
 be provid to show them entertain . 
 flaviu . [ asid ] i scarc know how . 
 
 enter anoth servant 
 
 second servant . may it pleas vour honour , lord luciu , out of hi 
 free love , hath present to you four milk-whit hors , trapp 'd 
 in silver . 
 timon . i shall accept them fairli . let the present 
 be worthili entertain 'd . exit servant 
 
 enter a third servant 
 
 how now ! what news ? 
 third servant . pleas you , my lord , that honour gentleman , lord 
 lucullu , entreat your compani to-morrow to hunt with him and 
 ha sent your honour two brace of greyhound . 
 timon . i 'll hunt with him ; and let them be receiv 'd , 
 not without fair reward . exit servant 
 flaviu . [ asid ] what will thi come to ? 
 he command us to provid and give great gift , 
 and all out of an empti coffer ; 
 nor will he know hi purs , or yield me thi , 
 to show him what a beggar hi heart is , 
 be of no power to make hi wish good . 
 hi promis fli so beyond hi state 
 that what he speak is all in debt ; he owe 
 for ev'ri word . he is so kind that he now 
 pay interest for't ; hi land 's put to their book . 
 well , would i were gentli put out of offic 
 befor i were forc 'd out ! 
 happier is he that ha no friend to feed 
 than such that do e'en enemi exceed . 
 i bleed inwardli for my lord . exit 
 timon . you do yourselv much wrong ; 
 you bate too much of your own merit . 
 here , my lord , a trifl of our love . 
 second lord . with more than common thank i will receiv it . 
 third lord . o , he 's the veri soul of bounti ! 
 timon . and now i rememb , my lord , you gave good word the other 
 day of a bay courser i rode on . 't is your becaus you lik 'd it . 
 third lord . o , i beseech you pardon me , my lord , in that . 
 timon . you may take my word , my lord : i know no man 
 can justli prais but what he doe affect . 
 i weigh my friend 's affect with mine own . 
 i 'll tell you true ; i 'll call to you . 
 all lord . o , none so welcom ! 
 timon . i take all and your sever visit 
 so kind to heart 't is not enough to give ; 
 methink i could deal kingdom to my friend 
 and ne'er be weari . alcibiad , 
 thou art a soldier , therefor seldom rich . 
 it come in chariti to thee ; for all thi live 
 is 'mongst the dead , and all the land thou hast 
 lie in a pitch 'd field . 
 alcibiad . ay , defil 'd land , my lord . 
 first lord . we are so virtuous bound- 
 timon . and so am i to you . 
 second lord . so infinit endear'd- 
 timon . all to you . light , more light ! 
 first lord . the best of happi , honour , and fortun , keep with 
 you , lord timon ! 
 timon . readi for hi friend . 
 exeunt all but apemantu and timon 
 apemantu . what a coil 's here ! 
 serv of beck and jutting-out of bum ! 
 i doubt whether their leg be worth the sum 
 that are given for 'em . friendship 's full of dreg : 
 methink fals heart should never have sound leg . 
 thu honest fool lay out their wealth on curtsi . 
 timon . now , apemantu , if thou wert not sullen 
 i would be good to thee . 
 apemantu . no , i 'll noth ; for if i should be brib 'd too , there 
 would be none left to rail upon thee , and then thou wouldst sin 
 the faster . thou giv'st so long , timon , i fear me thou wilt give 
 away thyself in paper shortli . what need these feast , pomp , 
 and vain-glori ? 
 timon . nay , an you begin to rail on societi onc , i am sworn not to 
 give regard to you . farewel ; and come with better music . 
 exit 
 apemantu . so . thou wilt not hear me now : thou shalt not then . i 'll 
 lock thi heaven from thee . 
 o that men 's ear should be 
 to counsel deaf , but not to flatteri ! exit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act ii . scene i . 
 a senat 's hous 
 
 enter a senat , with paper in hi hand 
 
 senat . and late , five thousand . to varro and to isidor 
 he owe nine thousand ; besid my former sum , 
 which make it five and twenti . still in motion 
 of rage wast ? it can not hold ; it will not . 
 if i want gold , steal but a beggar 's dog 
 and give it timon , whi , the dog coin gold . 
 if i would sell my hors and buy twenti moe 
 better than he , whi , give my hors to timon , 
 ask noth , give it him , it foal me straight , 
 and abl hors . no porter at hi gate , 
 but rather one that smile and still invit 
 all that pass by . it can not hold ; no reason 
 can sound hi state in safeti . caphi , ho ! 
 caphi , i say ! 
 
 enter caphi 
 
 caphi . here , sir ; what is your pleasur ? 
 senat . get on your cloak and hast you to lord timon ; 
 importun him for my money ; be not cea 'd 
 with slight denial , nor then silenc 'd when 
 'commend me to your master ' and the cap 
 play in the right hand , thu ; but tell him 
 my use cri to me , i must serv my turn 
 out of mine own ; hi day and time are past , 
 and my relianc on hi fract date 
 have smit my credit . i love and honour him , 
 but must not break my back to heal hi finger . 
 immedi are my need , and my relief 
 must not be toss 'd and turn 'd to me in word , 
 but find suppli immedi . get you gone ; 
 put on a most importun aspect , 
 a visag of demand ; for i do fear , 
 when everi feather stick in hi own wing , 
 lord timon will be left a nake gull , 
 which flash now a phoenix . get you gone . 
 caphi . i go , sir . 
 senat . take the bond along with you , 
 and have the date in compt . 
 caphi . i will , sir . 
 senat . go . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 befor timon 's hous 
 
 enter flaviu , timon 's steward , with mani bill in hi hand 
 
 flaviu . no care , no stop ! so senseless of expens 
 that he will neither know how to maintain it 
 nor ceas hi flow of riot ; take no account 
 how thing go from him , nor resum no care 
 of what is to continu . never mind 
 wa to be so unwis to be so kind . 
 what shall be done ? he will not hear till feel . 
 i must be round with him . now he come from hunt . 
 fie , fie , fie , fie ! 
 
 enter caphi , and the servant of isidor and varro 
 
 caphi . good even , varro . what , you come for money ? 
 varro 's servant . is't not your busi too ? 
 caphi . it is . and your too , isidor ? 
 isidor 's servant . it is so . 
 caphi . would we were all discharg 'd ! 
 varro 's servant . i fear it . 
 caphi . here come the lord . 
 
 enter timon and hi train , with alcibiad 
 
 timon . so soon as dinner 's done we 'll forth again , 
 my alcibiades.- with me ? what is your will ? 
 caphi . my lord , here is a note of certain due . 
 timon . due ! whenc are you ? 
 caphi . of athen here , my lord . 
 timon . go to my steward . 
 caphi . pleas it your lordship , he hath put me off 
 to the success of new day thi month . 
 my master is awak 'd by great occas 
 to call upon hi own , and humbl pray you 
 that with your other nobl part you 'll suit 
 in give him hi right . 
 timon . mine honest friend , 
 i prithe but repair to me next morn . 
 caphi . nay , good my lord- 
 timon . contain thyself , good friend . 
 varro 's servant . one varro 's servant , my good lord- 
 isidor 's servant . from isidor : he humbl pray your speedi 
 payment- 
 caphi . if you did know , my lord , my master 's wants- 
 varro 's servant . 't wa due on forfeitur , my lord , six week and 
 past . 
 isidor 's servant . your steward put me off , my lord ; and 
 i am sent expressli to your lordship . 
 timon . give me breath . 
 i do beseech you , good my lord , keep on ; 
 i 'll wait upon you instantli . 
 exeunt alcibiad and lord 
 [ to flaviu ] come hither . pray you , 
 how goe the world that i am thu encount'r 
 with clamor demand of date-brok bond 
 and the detent of long-since-du debt , 
 against my honour ? 
 flaviu . pleas you , gentlemen , 
 the time is unagre to thi busi . 
 your importunaci ceas till after dinner , 
 that i may make hi lordship understand 
 wherefor you are not paid . 
 timon . do so , my friend . 
 see them well entertain 'd . exit 
 flaviu . pray draw near . exit 
 
 enter apemantu and fool 
 
 caphi . stay , stay , here come the fool with apemantu . 
 let 's ha ' some sport with 'em . 
 varro 's servant . hang him , he 'll abus us ! 
 isidor 's servant . a plagu upon him , dog ! 
 varro 's servant . how dost , fool ? 
 apemantu . dost dialogu with thi shadow ? 
 varro 's servant . i speak not to thee . 
 apemantu . no , 't is to thyself . [ to the fool ] come away . 
 isidor 's servant . [ to varro 's servant ] there 's the fool hang on 
 your back alreadi . 
 apemantu . no , thou stand'st singl ; th'art not on him yet . 
 caphi . where 's the fool now ? 
 apemantu . he last ask 'd the question . poor rogu and usur ' 
 men ! bawd between gold and want ! 
 all servant . what are we , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . ass . 
 all servant . whi ? 
 apemantu . that you ask me what you are , and do not know 
 yourselv . speak to 'em , fool . 
 fool . how do you , gentlemen ? 
 all servant . gramerci , good fool . how doe your mistress ? 
 fool . she 's e'en set on water to scald such chicken as you 
 are . would we could see you at corinth ! 
 apemantu . good ! gramerci . 
 
 enter page 
 
 fool . look you , here come my mistress ' page . 
 page . [ to the fool ] whi , how now , captain ? what do you in thi wise 
 compani ? how dost thou , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . would i had a rod in my mouth , that i might answer thee 
 profit ! 
 page . prithe , apemantu , read me the superscript of these 
 letter ; i know not which is which . 
 apemantu . canst not read ? 
 page . no . 
 apemantu . there will littl learn die , then , that day thou art 
 hang 'd . thi is to lord timon ; thi to alcibiad . go ; thou wast 
 born a bastard , and thou't die a bawd . 
 page . thou wast whelp 'd a dog , and thou shalt famish dog 's death . 
 answer not : i am gone . exit page 
 apemantu . e'en so thou outrun'st grace . 
 fool , i will go with you to lord timon 's . 
 fool . will you leav me there ? 
 apemantu . if timon stay at home . you three serv three usur ? 
 all servant . ay ; would they serv 'd us ! 
 apemantu . so would i- as good a trick as ever hangman serv 'd 
 thief . 
 fool . are you three usur ' men ? 
 all servant . ay , fool . 
 fool . i think no usur but ha a fool to hi servant . my mistress 
 is one , and i am her fool . when men come to borrow of your 
 master , they approach sadli and go away merri ; but they enter my 
 mistress ' hous merrili and go away sadli . the reason of thi ? 
 varro 's servant . i could render one . 
 apemantu . do it then , that we may account thee a whoremast and a 
 knave ; which notwithstand , thou shalt be no less esteem . 
 varro 's servant . what is a whoremast , fool ? 
 fool . a fool in good cloth , and someth like thee . 't is a 
 spirit . sometim 't appear like a lord ; sometim like a lawyer ; 
 sometim like a philosoph , with two stone moe than 's 
 artifici one . he is veri often like a knight ; and , gener , 
 in all shape that man goe up and down in from fourscor to 
 thirteen , thi spirit walk in . 
 varro 's servant . thou art not altogeth a fool . 
 fool . nor thou altogeth a wise man . 
 as much fooleri as i have , so much wit thou lack'st . 
 apemantu . that answer might have becom apemantu . 
 varro 's servant . asid , asid ; here come lord timon . 
 
 re-ent timon and flaviu 
 
 apemantu . come with me , fool , come . 
 fool . i do not alway follow lover , elder brother , and woman ; 
 sometim the philosoph . 
 exeunt apemantu and fool 
 flaviu . pray you walk near ; i 'll speak with you anon . 
 exeunt servant 
 timon . you make me marvel wherefor ere thi time 
 had you not fulli laid my state befor me , 
 that i might so have rate my expens 
 as i had leav of mean . 
 flaviu . you would not hear me 
 at mani leisur i propo 'd . 
 timon . go to ; 
 perchanc some singl vantag you took 
 when my indisposit put you back , 
 and that unapt made your minist 
 thu to excus yourself . 
 flaviu . o my good lord , 
 at mani time i brought in my account , 
 laid them befor you ; you would throw them off 
 and say you found them in mine honesti . 
 when , for some trifl present , you have bid me 
 return so much , i have shook my head and wept ; 
 yea , 'gainst th ' author of manner , pray 'd you 
 to hold your hand more close . i did endur 
 not seldom , nor no slight check , when i have 
 prompt you in the ebb of your estat 
 and your great flow of debt . my lov 'd lord , 
 though you hear now- too late ! - yet now 's a time : 
 the greatest of your have lack a half 
 to pay your present debt . 
 timon . let all my land be sold . 
 flaviu . 't is all engag 'd , some forfeit and gone ; 
 and what remain will hardli stop the mouth 
 of present due . the futur come apac ; 
 what shall defend the interim ? and at length 
 how goe our reck'n ? 
 timon . to lacedaemon did my land extend . 
 flaviu . o my good lord , the world is but a word ; 
 were it all your to give it in a breath , 
 how quickli were it gone ! 
 timon . you tell me true . 
 flaviu . if you suspect my husbandri or falsehood , 
 call me befor th ' exactest auditor 
 and set me on the proof . so the god bless me , 
 when all our offic have been oppress 'd 
 with riotou feeder , when our vault have wept 
 with drunken spilth of wine , when everi room 
 hath blaz 'd with light and bray 'd with minstrelsi , 
 i have retir 'd me to a wast cock 
 and set mine eye at flow . 
 timon . prithe no more . 
 flaviu . 'heaven , ' have i said 'the bounti of thi lord ! 
 how mani prodig bit have slave and peasant 
 thi night englut ! who is not lord timon 's ? 
 what heart , head , sword , forc , mean , but is lord timon 's ? 
 great timon , nobl , worthi , royal timon ! ' 
 ah ! when the mean are gone that buy thi prais , 
 the breath is gone whereof thi prais is made . 
 feast-won , fast-lost ; one cloud of winter show'r , 
 these fli are couch 'd . 
 timon . come , sermon me no further . 
 no villain bounti yet hath pass 'd my heart ; 
 unwis , not ignobl , have i given . 
 whi dost thou weep ? canst thou the conscienc lack 
 to think i shall lack friend ? secur thi heart : 
 if i would broach the vessel of my love , 
 and tri the argument of heart by borrow , 
 men and men 's fortun could i frankli use 
 as i can bid thee speak . 
 flaviu . assur bless your thought ! 
 timon . and , in some sort , these want of mine are crown 'd 
 that i account them bless ; for by these 
 shall i tri friend . you shall perceiv how you 
 mistak my fortun ; i am wealthi in my friend . 
 within there ! flaminiu ! serviliu ! 
 
 enter flaminiu , serviliu , and anoth servant 
 
 servant . my lord ! my lord ! 
 timon . i will dispatch you severally- you to lord luciu ; to lord 
 lucullu you ; i hunt with hi honour to-day . you to semproniu . 
 commend me to their love ; and i am proud , say , that my occas 
 have found time to use 'em toward a suppli of money . let the 
 request be fifti talent . 
 flaminiu . as you have said , my lord . exeunt servant 
 flaviu . [ asid ] lord luciu and lucullu ? humh ! 
 timon . go you , sir , to the senat , 
 of whom , even to the state 's best health , i have 
 deserv 'd thi hear . bid 'em send o ' th ' instant 
 a thousand talent to me . 
 flaviu . i have been bold , 
 for that i knew it the most gener way , 
 to them to use your signet and your name ; 
 but they do shake their head , and i am here 
 no richer in return . 
 timon . is't true ? ca n't be ? 
 flaviu . they answer , in a joint and corpor voic , 
 that now they are at fall , want treasur , can not 
 do what they would , are sorry- you are honourable- 
 but yet they could have wish'd- they know not- 
 someth hath been amiss- a nobl natur 
 may catch a wrench- would all were well ! - 't is pity- 
 and so , intend other seriou matter , 
 after distast look , and these hard fraction , 
 with certain half-cap and cold-mov nod , 
 they froze me into silenc . 
 timon . you god , reward them ! 
 prithe , man , look cheerli . these old fellow 
 have their ingratitud in them hereditari . 
 their blood is cak 'd , 't is cold , it seldom flow ; 
 't is lack of kindli warmth they are not kind ; 
 and natur , as it grow again toward earth , 
 is fashion 'd for the journey dull and heavi . 
 go to ventidiu . prithe be not sad , 
 thou art true and honest ; ingeni i speak , 
 no blame belong to thee . ventidiu late 
 buri hi father , by whose death he 's stepp 'd 
 into a great estat . when he wa poor , 
 imprison 'd , and in scarciti of friend , 
 i clear 'd him with five talent . greet him from me , 
 bid him suppos some good necess 
 touch hi friend , which crave to be rememb'r 
 with those five talent . that had , give't these fellow 
 to whom 't is instant due . nev ' r speak or think 
 that timon 's fortun 'mong hi friend can sink . 
 flaviu . i would i could not think it . 
 that thought is bounti 's foe ; 
 be free itself , it think all other so . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iii . scene i . 
 lucullu ' hous 
 
 flaminiu wait to speak with lucullu . enter servant to him 
 
 servant . i have told my lord of you ; he is come down to you . 
 flaminiu . i thank you , sir . 
 
 enter lucullu 
 
 servant . here 's my lord . 
 lucullu . [ asid ] one of lord timon 's men ? a gift , i warrant . whi , 
 thi hit right ; i dreamt of a silver basin and ewer to-night- 
 flaminiu , honest flaminiu , you are veri respect welcom , 
 sir . fill me some wine . [ exit servant ] and how doe that 
 honour , complet , freeheart gentleman of athen , thi veri 
 bounti good lord and master ? 
 flaminiu . hi health is well , sir . 
 lucullu . i am right glad that hi health is well , sir . and what 
 hast thou there under thi cloak , pretti flaminiu ? 
 flaminiu . faith , noth but an empti box , sir , which in my lord 's 
 behalf i come to entreat your honour to suppli ; who , have 
 great and instant occas to use fifti talent , hath sent to 
 your lordship to furnish him , noth doubt your present 
 assist therein . 
 luculliu . la , la , la , la ! 'noth doubt ' say he ? ala , good 
 lord ! a nobl gentleman 't is , if he would not keep so good a 
 hous . mani a time and often i ha ' din 'd with him and told him 
 o n't ; and come again to supper to him of purpos to have him 
 spend less ; and yet he would embrac no counsel , take no warn 
 by my come . everi man ha hi fault , and honesti is hi . i ha ' 
 told him o n't , but i could ne'er get him from't . 
 
 re-ent servant , with wine 
 
 servant . pleas your lordship , here is the wine . 
 lucullu . flaminiu , i have note thee alway wise . here 's to thee . 
 flaminiu . your lordship speak your pleasur . 
 lucullu . i have observ thee alway for a towardli prompt spirit , 
 give thee thi due , and one that know what belong to reason , and 
 canst use the time well , if the time use thee well . good part in 
 thee . [ to servant ] get you gone , sirrah . [ exit servant ] draw 
 nearer , honest flaminiu . thi lord 's a bounti gentleman ; but 
 thou art wise , and thou know'st well enough , although thou com'st 
 to me , that thi is no time to lend money , especi upon bare 
 friendship without secur . here 's three solidar for thee . 
 good boy , wink at me , and say thou saw'st me not . fare thee well . 
 flaminiu . is't possibl the world should so much differ , 
 and we aliv that liv 'd ? fli , damn base , 
 to him that worship thee . [ throw the money back ] 
 lucullu . ha ! now i see thou art a fool , and fit for thi master . 
 exit 
 flaminiu . may these add to the number that may scald thee ! 
 let molten coin be thi damnat , 
 thou diseas of a friend and not himself ! 
 ha friendship such a faint and milki heart 
 it turn in less than two night ? o you god , 
 i feel my master 's passion ! thi slave 
 unto hi honour ha my lord 's meat in him ; 
 whi should it thrive and turn to nutriment 
 when he is turn 'd to poison ? 
 o , may diseas onli work upo n't ! 
 and when he 's sick to death , let not that part of natur 
 which my lord paid for be of ani power 
 to expel sick , but prolong hi hour ! exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 a public place 
 
 enter luciu , with three stranger 
 
 luciu . who , the lord timon ? he is my veri good friend , and an 
 honour gentleman . 
 first stranger . we know him for no less , though we are but 
 stranger to him . but i can tell you one thing , my lord , and 
 which i hear from common rumour : now lord timon 's happi hour 
 are done and past , and hi estat shrink from him . 
 luciu . fie , no : do not believ it ; he can not want for money . 
 second stranger . but believ you thi , my lord , that not long ago 
 one of hi men wa with the lord lucullu to borrow so mani 
 talent ; nay , urg 'd extrem for't , and show what necess 
 belong 'd to't , and yet wa deni . 
 luciu . how ? 
 second stranger . i tell you , deni , my lord . 
 luciu . what a strang case wa that ! now , befor the god , i am 
 asham 'd o n't . deni that honour man ! there wa veri littl 
 honour show 'd i n't . for my own part , i must need confess i have 
 receiv some small kind from him , as money , plate , jewel , 
 and such-lik trifl , noth compar to hi ; yet , had he 
 mistook him and sent to me , i should ne'er have deni hi 
 occas so mani talent . 
 
 enter serviliu 
 
 serviliu . see , by good hap , yonder 's my lord ; i have sweat to see 
 hi honour.- my honour 'd lord ! 
 luciu . serviliu ? you are kindli met , sir . fare thee well ; commend 
 me to thi honour virtuou lord , my veri exquisit friend . 
 serviliu . may it pleas your honour , my lord hath sent- 
 luciu . ha ! what ha he sent ? i am so much endear to that lord : 
 he 's ever send . how shall i thank him , think'st thou ? and what 
 ha he sent now ? 
 serviliu . ha onli sent hi present occas now , my lord , 
 request your lordship to suppli hi instant use with so mani 
 talent . 
 luciu . i know hi lordship is but merri with me ; 
 he can not want fifty-f hundr talent . 
 serviliu . but in the mean time he want less , my lord . 
 if hi occas were not virtuou 
 i should not urg it half so faith . 
 luciu . dost thou speak serious , serviliu ? 
 serviliu . upon my soul , 't is true , sir . 
 luciu . what a wick beast wa i to disfurnish myself against such 
 a good time , when i might ha ' shown myself honour ! how 
 unluckili it happ'n that i should purchas the day befor for a 
 littl part and undo a great deal of honour ! serviliu , now 
 befor the god , i am not abl to do- the more beast , i say ! i 
 wa send to use lord timon myself , these gentlemen can 
 wit ; but i would not for the wealth of athen i had done't 
 now . commend me bounti to hi good lordship , and i hope hi 
 honour will conceiv the fairest of me , becaus i have no power 
 to be kind . and tell him thi from me : i count it one of my 
 greatest afflict , say , that i can not pleasur such an 
 honour gentleman . good serviliu , will you befriend me so far 
 as to use mine own word to him ? 
 serviliu . ye , sir , i shall . 
 luciu . i 'll look you out a good turn , serviliu . 
 exit serviliu 
 true , as you said , timon is shrunk inde ; 
 and he that 's onc deni will hardli speed . exit 
 first stranger . do you observ thi , hostiliu ? 
 second stranger . ay , too well . 
 first stranger . whi , thi is the world 's soul ; and just of the same 
 piec 
 is everi flatter 's spirit . who can call him hi friend 
 that dip in the same dish ? for , in my know , 
 timon ha been thi lord 's father , 
 and kept hi credit with hi purs ; 
 support hi estat ; nay , timon 's money 
 ha paid hi men their wage . he ne'er drink 
 but timon 's silver tread upon hi lip ; 
 and yet- o , see the monstrous of man 
 when he look out in an ungrat shape ! - 
 he doe deni him , in respect of hi , 
 what charit men afford to beggar . 
 third stranger . religion groan at it . 
 first stranger . for mine own part , 
 i never tast timon in my life , 
 nor came ani of hi bounti over me 
 to mark me for hi friend ; yet i protest , 
 for hi right nobl mind , illustri virtu , 
 and honour carriag , 
 had hi necess made use of me , 
 i would have put my wealth into donat , 
 and the best half should have return 'd to him , 
 so much i love hi heart . but i perceiv 
 men must learn now with piti to dispens ; 
 for polici sit abov conscienc . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 semproniu ' hous 
 
 enter semproniu and a servant of timon 's 
 
 semproniu . must he need troubl me i n't ? hum ! 'bove all other ? 
 he might have tri lord luciu or lucullu ; 
 and now ventidiu is wealthi too , 
 whom he redeem 'd from prison . all these 
 owe their estat unto him . 
 servant . my lord , 
 they have all been touch 'd and found base metal , for 
 they have all deni him . 
 semproniu . how ! have they deni him ? 
 ha ventidiu and lucullu deni him ? 
 and doe he send to me ? three ? humh ! 
 it show but littl love or judgment in him . 
 must i be hi last refug ? hi friend , like physician , 
 thrice give him over . must i take th ' cure upon me ? 
 ha much disgrac 'd me i n't ; i 'm angri at him , 
 that might have known my place . i see no sens for't , 
 but hi occas might have woo 'd me first ; 
 for , in my conscienc , i wa the first man 
 that e'er receiv gift from him . 
 and doe he think so backwardli of me now 
 that i 'll requit it last ? no ; 
 so it may prove an argument of laughter 
 to th ' rest , and i 'mongst lord be thought a fool . 
 i 'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum 
 had sent to me first , but for my mind 's sake ; 
 i 'd such a courag to do him good . but now return , 
 and with their faint repli thi answer join : 
 who bate mine honour shall not know my coin . exit 
 servant . excel ! your lordship 's a goodli villain . the devil 
 knew not what he did when he made man politic- he cross 'd himself 
 by't ; and i can not think but , in the end , the villaini of man 
 will set him clear . how fairli thi lord strive to appear foul ! 
 take virtuou copi to be wick , like those that under hot 
 ardent zeal would set whole realm on fire . 
 of such a natur is hi polit love . 
 thi wa my lord 's best hope ; now all are fled , 
 save onli the god . now hi friend are dead , 
 door that were ne'er acquaint with their ward 
 mani a bounteou year must be employ 'd 
 now to guard sure their master . 
 and thi is all a liber cours allow : 
 who can not keep hi wealth must keep hi hous . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 a hall in timon 's hous 
 
 enter two of varro 's men , meet luciu ' servant , and other , 
 all be servant of timon 's creditor , to wait for hi come out . 
 then enter titu and hortensiu 
 
 first varro 's servant . well met ; good morrow , titu and hortensiu . 
 titu . the like to you , kind varro . 
 hortensiu . luciu ! what , do we meet togeth ? 
 luciu ' servant . ay , and i think one busi doe command us all ; 
 for mine is money . 
 titu . so is their and our . 
 
 enter philotu 
 
 luciu ' servant . and sir philotu too ! 
 philotu . good day at onc . 
 luciu ' servant . welcom , good brother , what do you think the hour ? 
 philotu . labour for nine . 
 luciu ' servant . so much ? 
 philotu . is not my lord seen yet ? 
 luciu ' servant . not yet . 
 philotu . i wonder o n't ; he wa wont to shine at seven . 
 luciu ' servant . ay , but the day are wax 'd shorter with him ; 
 you must consid that a prodig cours 
 is like the sun 's , but not like hi recover . 
 i fear 
 't is deepest winter in lord timon 's purs ; 
 that is , one may reach deep enough and yet 
 find littl . 
 philotu . i am of your fear for that . 
 titu . i 'll show you how t ' observ a strang event . 
 your lord send now for money . 
 hortensiu . most true , he doe . 
 titu . and he wear jewel now of timon 's gift , 
 for which i wait for money . 
 hortensiu . it is against my heart . 
 luciu ' servant . mark how strang it show 
 timon in thi should pay more than he owe ; 
 and e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewel 
 and send for money for 'em . 
 hortensiu . i 'm weari of thi charg , the god can wit ; 
 i know my lord hath spent of timon 's wealth , 
 and now ingratitud make it wors than stealth . 
 first varro 's servant . ye , mine 's three thousand crown ; what 's 
 your ? 
 luciu ' servant . five thousand mine . 
 first varro 's servant . 't is much deep ; and it should seem by th ' 
 sum 
 your master 's confid wa abov mine , 
 els sure hi had equal 'd . 
 
 enter flaminiu 
 
 titu . one of lord timon 's men . 
 luciu ' servant . flaminiu ! sir , a word . pray , is my lord readi to 
 come forth ? 
 flaminiu . no , inde , he is not . 
 titu . we attend hi lordship ; pray signifi so much . 
 flaminiu . i need not tell him that ; he know you are to dilig . 
 exit 
 
 enter flaviu , in a cloak , muffl 
 
 luciu ' servant . ha ! is not that hi steward muffl so ? 
 he goe away in a cloud . call him , call him . 
 titu . do you hear , sir ? 
 second varro 's servant . by your leav , sir . 
 flaviu . what do ye ask of me , my friend ? 
 titu . we wait for certain money here , sir . 
 flaviu . ay , 
 if money were as certain as your wait , 
 'twere sure enough . 
 whi then preferr 'd you not your sum and bill 
 when your fals master eat of my lord 's meat ? 
 then they could smile , and fawn upon hi debt , 
 and take down th ' int'rest into their glutt'nou maw . 
 you do yourselv but wrong to stir me up ; 
 let me pass quietli . 
 believe't , my lord and i have made an end : 
 i have no more to reckon , he to spend . 
 luciu ' servant . ay , but thi answer will not serv . 
 flaviu . if 'twill not serv , 't is not so base as you , 
 for you serv knave . exit 
 first varro 's servant . how ! what doe hi cashier 'd worship mutter ? 
 second varro 's servant . no matter what ; he 's poor , and that 's 
 reveng enough . who can speak broader than he that ha no hous 
 to put hi head in ? such may rail against great build . 
 
 enter serviliu 
 
 titu . o , here 's serviliu ; now we shall know some answer . 
 serviliu . if i might beseech you , gentlemen , to repair some other 
 hour , i should deriv much from't ; for take't of my soul , my lord 
 lean wondrous to discont . hi comfort temper ha 
 forsook him ; he 's much out of health and keep hi chamber . 
 luciu ' servant . mani do keep their chamber are not sick ; 
 and if it be so far beyond hi health , 
 methink he should the sooner pay hi debt , 
 and make a clear way to the god . 
 serviliu . good god ! 
 titu . we can not take thi for answer , sir . 
 flaminiu . [ within ] serviliu , help ! my lord ! my lord ! 
 
 enter timon , in a rage , flaminiu follow 
 
 timon . what , are my door oppo 'd against my passag ? 
 have i been ever free , and must my hous 
 be my retent enemi , my gaol ? 
 the place which i have feast , doe it now , 
 like all mankind , show me an iron heart ? 
 luciu ' servant . put in now , titu . 
 titu . my lord , here is my bill . 
 luciu ' servant . here 's mine . 
 hortensiu . and mine , my lord . 
 both varro 's servant . and our , my lord . 
 philotu . all our bill . 
 timon . knock me down with 'em ; cleav me to the girdl . 
 luciu ' servant . ala , my lord- 
 timon . cut my heart in sum . 
 titu . mine , fifti talent . 
 timon . tell out my blood . 
 luciu ' servant . five thousand crown , my lord . 
 timon . five thousand drop pay that . what your ? and your ? 
 first varro 's servant . my lord- 
 second varro 's servant . my lord- 
 timon . tear me , take me , and the god fall upon you ! exit 
 hortensiu . faith , i perceiv our master may throw their cap at 
 their money . these debt may well be call 'd desper one , for a 
 madman owe 'em . exeunt 
 
 re-ent timon and flaviu 
 
 timon . they have e'en put my breath from me , the slave . 
 creditor ? devil ! 
 flaviu . my dear lord- 
 timon . what if it should be so ? 
 flaminiu . my lord- 
 timon . i 'll have it so . my steward ! 
 flaviu . here , my lord . 
 timon . so fitli ? go , bid all my friend again : 
 luciu , lucullu , and sempronius- all . 
 i 'll onc more feast the rascal . 
 flaviu . o my lord , 
 you onli speak from your distract soul ; 
 there is not so much left to furnish out 
 a moder tabl . 
 timon . be it not in thi care . 
 go , i charg thee , invit them all ; let in the tide 
 of knave onc more ; my cook and i 'll provid . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene v. 
 the senat hous 
 
 enter three senat at one door , alcibiad meet them , with attend 
 
 first senat . my lord , you have my voic to't : the fault 's bloodi . 
 't is necessari he should die : 
 noth embolden sin so much as merci . 
 second senat . most true ; the law shall bruis him . 
 alcibiad . honour , health , and compass , to the senat ! 
 first senat . now , captain ? 
 alcibiad . i am an humbl suitor to your virtu ; 
 for piti is the virtu of the law , 
 and none but tyrant use it cruelli . 
 it pleas time and fortun to lie heavi 
 upon a friend of mine , who in hot blood 
 hath stepp 'd into the law , which is past depth 
 to those that without heed do plung into't . 
 he is a man , set hi fate asid , 
 of come virtu ; 
 nor did he soil the fact with cowardice- 
 an honour in him which buy out hi fault- 
 but with a nobl furi and fair spirit , 
 see hi reput touch 'd to death , 
 he did oppos hi foe ; 
 and with such sober and unnot passion 
 he did behov hi anger ere 't wa spent , 
 as if he had but prov 'd an argument . 
 first senat . you undergo too strict a paradox , 
 strive to make an ugli deed look fair ; 
 your word have took such pain as if they labour 'd 
 to bring manslaught into form and set 
 quarrel upon the head of valour ; which , inde , 
 is valour misbegot , and came into the world 
 when sect and faction were newli born . 
 he 's truli valiant that can wise suffer 
 the worst that man can breath , 
 and make hi wrong hi outsid , 
 to wear them like hi raiment , carelessli , 
 and ne'er prefer hi injuri to hi heart , 
 to bring it into danger . 
 if wrong be evil , and enforc us kill , 
 what folli 't is to hazard life for ill ! 
 alcibiad . my lord- 
 first senat . you can not make gross sin look clear : 
 to reveng is no valour , but to bear . 
 alcibiad . my lord , then , under favour , pardon me 
 if i speak like a captain : 
 whi do fond men expos themselv to battl , 
 and not endur all threat ? sleep upo n't , 
 and let the foe quietli cut their throat , 
 without repugn ? if there be 
 such valour in the bear , what make we 
 abroad ? whi , then , women are more valiant , 
 that stay at home , if bear carri it ; 
 and the ass more captain than the lion ; the fellow 
 loaden with iron wiser than the judg , 
 if wisdom be in suffer . o my lord , 
 as you are great , be piti good . 
 who can not condemn rash in cold blood ? 
 to kill , i grant , is sin 's extremest gust ; 
 but , in defenc , by merci , 't is most just . 
 to be in anger is impieti ; 
 but who is man that is not angri ? 
 weigh but the crime with thi . 
 second senat . you breath in vain . 
 alcibiad . in vain ! hi servic done 
 at lacedaemon and byzantium 
 were a suffici briber for hi life . 
 first senat . what 's that ? 
 alcibiad . whi , i say , my lord , ha done fair servic , 
 and slain in fight mani of your enemi ; 
 how full of valour did he bear himself 
 in the last conflict , and made plenteou wound ! 
 second senat . he ha made too much plenti with 'em . 
 he 's a sworn rioter ; he ha a sin that often 
 drown him and take hi valour prison . 
 if there were no foe , that were enough 
 to overcom him . in that beastli furi 
 he ha been known to commit outrag 
 and cherish faction . 't is inferr 'd to us 
 hi day are foul and hi drink danger . 
 first senat . he die . 
 alcibiad . hard fate ! he might have die in war . 
 my lord , if not for ani part in him- 
 though hi right arm might purchas hi own time , 
 and be in debt to none- yet , more to move you , 
 take my desert to hi , and join 'em both ; 
 and , for i know your reverend age love 
 secur , i 'll pawn my victori , all 
 my honour to you , upon hi good return . 
 if by thi crime he owe the law hi life , 
 whi , let the war receive't in valiant gore ; 
 for law is strict , and war is noth more . 
 first senat . we are for law : he die . urg it no more 
 on height of our displeasur . friend or brother , 
 he forfeit hi own blood that spill anoth . 
 alcibiad . must it be so ? it must not be . my lord , 
 i do beseech you , know me . 
 second senat . how ! 
 alcibiad . call me to your remembr . 
 third senat . what ! 
 alcibiad . i can not think but your age ha forgot me ; 
 it could not els be i should prove so base 
 to sue , and be deni such common grace . 
 my wound ach at you . 
 first senat . do you dare our anger ? 
 't is in few word , but spaciou in effect : 
 we banish thee for ever . 
 alcibiad . banish me ! 
 banish your dotag ! banish usuri 
 that make the senat ugli . 
 first senat . if after two day ' shine athen contain thee , 
 attend our weightier judgment . and , not to swell our spirit , 
 he shall be execut present . exeunt senat 
 alcibiad . now the god keep you old enough that you may live 
 onli in bone , that none may look on you ! 
 i 'm wors than mad ; i have kept back their foe , 
 while they have told their money and let out 
 their coin upon larg interest , i myself 
 rich onli in larg hurt . all those for thi ? 
 is thi the balsam that the usur senat 
 pour into captain ' wound ? banish ! 
 it come not ill ; i hate not to be banish 'd ; 
 it is a caus worthi my spleen and furi , 
 that i may strike at athen . i 'll cheer up 
 my discont troop , and lay for heart . 
 't is honour with most land to be at odd ; 
 soldier should brook as littl wrong as god . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene vi . 
 a banquet hall in timon 's hous 
 
 music . tabl set out ; servant attend . enter diver lord , 
 friend of timon , at sever door 
 
 first lord . the good time of day to you , sir . 
 second lord . i also wish it to you . i think thi honour lord 
 did but tri us thi other day . 
 first lord . upon that were my thought tire when we encount'r . 
 i hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial 
 of hi sever friend . 
 second lord . it should not be , by the persuas of hi new 
 feast . 
 first lord . i should think so . he hath sent me an earnest invit , 
 which mani my near occas did urg me to put off ; but he hath 
 conjur 'd me beyond them , and i must need appear . 
 second lord . in like manner wa i in debt to my importun 
 busi , but he would not hear my excus . i am sorri , when he 
 sent to borrow of me , that my provis wa out . 
 first lord . i am sick of that grief too , as i understand how all 
 thing go . 
 second lord . everi man here 's so . what would he have borrow of 
 you ? 
 first lord . a thousand piec . 
 second lord . a thousand piec ! 
 first lord . what of you ? 
 second lord . he sent to me , sir- here he come . 
 
 enter timon and attend 
 
 timon . with all my heart , gentlemen both ! and how fare you ? 
 first lord . ever at the best , hear well of your lordship . 
 second lord . the swallow follow not summer more will than we 
 your lordship . 
 timon . [ asid ] nor more willingli leav winter ; such summer-bird 
 are men- gentlemen , our dinner will not recompens thi long 
 stay ; feast your ear with the music awhil , if they will fare so 
 harshli o ' th ' trumpet 's sound ; we shall to't present . 
 first lord . i hope it remain not unkindli with your lordship that 
 i return 'd you an empti messeng . 
 timon . o sir , let it not troubl you . 
 second lord . my nobl lord- 
 timon . ah , my good friend , what cheer ? 
 second lord . my most honour lord , i am e'en sick of shame that , 
 when your lordship thi other day sent to me , i wa so 
 unfortun a beggar . 
 timon . think not o n't , sir . 
 second lord . if you had sent but two hour before- 
 timon . let it not cumber your better remembr . [ the banquet 
 brought in ] come , bring in all togeth . 
 second lord . all cover 'd dish ! 
 first lord . royal cheer , i warrant you . 
 third lord . doubt not that , if money and the season can yield it . 
 first lord . how do you ? what 's the news ? 
 third lord . alcibiad is banish 'd . hear you of it ? 
 first and second lord . alcibiad banish 'd ! 
 third lord . 't is so , be sure of it . 
 first lord . how ? how ? 
 second lord . i pray you , upon what ? 
 timon . my worthi friend , will you draw near ? 
 third lord . i 'll tell you more anon . here 's a nobl feast toward . 
 second lord . thi is the old man still . 
 third lord . will't hold ? will't hold ? 
 second lord . it doe ; but time will- and so- 
 third lord . i do conceiv . 
 timon . each man to hi stool with that spur as he would to the lip 
 of hi mistress ; your diet shall be in all place alik . make not 
 a citi feast of it , to let the meat cool ere we can agre upon 
 the first place . sit , sit . the god requir our thank : 
 
 you great benefactor , sprinkl our societi with thank . 
 for your own gift make yourselv prai 'd ; but reserv still to 
 give , lest your deiti be despis . lend to each man enough , 
 that one need not lend to anoth ; for were your god-head to 
 borrow of men , men would forsak the god . make the meat be 
 belov more than the man that give it . let no assembl of 
 twenti be without a score of villain . if there sit twelv women 
 at the tabl , let a dozen of them be- as they are . the rest of 
 your foe , o god , the senat of athen , togeth with the 
 common lag of peopl , what is amiss in them , you god , make 
 suitabl for destruct . for these my present friend , as they 
 are to me noth , so in noth bless them , and to noth are 
 they welcom . 
 
 uncov , dog , and lap . [ the dish are uncov and 
 seen to he full of warm water ] 
 some speak . what doe hi lordship mean ? 
 some other . i know not . 
 timon . may you a better feast never behold , 
 you knot of mouth-friend ! smoke and lukewarm water 
 is your perfect . thi is timon 's last ; 
 who , stuck and spangl with your flatteri , 
 wash it off , and sprinkl in your face 
 [ throw the water in their face ] 
 your reek villaini . live loath 'd and long , 
 most smile , smooth , detest parasit , 
 courteou destroy , affabl wolv , meek bear , 
 you fool of fortun , trencher friend , time 's fli , 
 cap and knee slave , vapour , and minute-lack ! 
 of man and beast the infinit maladi 
 crust you quit o'er ! what , dost thou go ? 
 soft , take thi physic first ; thou too , and thou . 
 stay , i will lend thee money , borrow none . [ throw the 
 dish at them , and drive them out ] 
 what , all in motion ? henceforth be no feast 
 whereat a villain 's not a welcom guest . 
 burn hous ! sink athen ! henceforth hate be 
 of timon man and all human ! exit 
 
 re-ent the lord 
 
 first lord . how now , my lord ! 
 second lord . know you the qualiti of lord timon 's furi ? 
 third lord . push ! did you see my cap ? 
 fourth lord . i have lost my gown . 
 first lord . he 's but a mad lord , and nought but humour sway him . 
 he gave me a jewel th ' other day , and now he ha beat it out of 
 my hat . did you see my jewel ? 
 third lord . did you see my cap ? 
 second lord . here 't is . 
 fourth lord . here lie my gown . 
 first lord . let 's make no stay . 
 second lord . lord timon 's mad . 
 third lord . i feel't upon my bone . 
 fourth lord . one day he give us diamond , next day stone . 
 exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act iv . scene i . 
 without the wall of athen 
 
 enter timon 
 
 timon . let me look back upon thee . o thou wall 
 that girdl in those wolv , dive in the earth 
 and fenc not athen ! matron , turn incontin . 
 obedi , fail in children ! slave and fool , 
 pluck the grave wrinkl senat from the bench 
 and minist in their stead . to gener filth 
 convert , o ' th ' instant , green virgin . 
 do't in your parent ' eye . bankrupt , hold fast ; 
 rather than render back , out with your knive 
 and cut your truster ' throat . bound servant , steal : 
 large-hand robber your grave master are , 
 and pill by law . maid , to thi master 's bed : 
 thi mistress is o ' th ' brothel . son of sixteen , 
 pluck the lin 'd crutch from thi old limp sire , 
 with it beat out hi brain . pieti and fear , 
 religion to the god , peac , justic , truth , 
 domest awe , night-rest , and neighbourhood , 
 instruct , manner , mysteri , and trade , 
 degre , observ , custom and law , 
 declin to your confound contrari 
 and let confus live . plagu incid to men , 
 your potent and infecti fever heap 
 on athen , ripe for stroke . thou cold sciatica , 
 crippl our senat , that their limb may halt 
 as lame as their manner . lust and liberti , 
 creep in the mind and marrow of our youth , 
 that 'gainst the stream of virtu they may strive 
 and drown themselv in riot . itch , blain , 
 sow all th ' athenian bosom , and their crop 
 be gener leprosi ! breath infect breath , 
 that their societi , as their friendship , may 
 be mere poison ! noth i 'll bear from thee 
 but naked , thou detest town ! 
 take thou that too , with multipli ban . 
 timon will to the wood , where he shall find 
 th ' unkindest beast more kinder than mankind . 
 the god confound- hear me , you good god all- 
 the athenian both within and out that wall ! 
 and grant , as timon grow , hi hate may grow 
 to the whole race of mankind , high and low ! 
 amen . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 athen . timon 's hous 
 
 enter flaviu , with two or three servant 
 
 first servant . hear you , master steward , where 's our master ? 
 are we undon , cast off , noth remain ? 
 flaviu . alack , my fellow , what should i say to you ? 
 let me be record by the righteou god , 
 i am as poor as you . 
 first servant . such a hous broke ! 
 so nobl a master fall'n ! all gone , and not 
 one friend to take hi fortun by the arm 
 and go along with him ? 
 second servant . as we do turn our back 
 from our companion , thrown into hi grave , 
 so hi familiar to hi buri fortun 
 slink all away ; leav their fals vow with him , 
 like empti purs pick 'd ; and hi poor self , 
 a dedic beggar to the air , 
 with hi diseas of all-shunn 'd poverti , 
 walk , like contempt , alon . more of our fellow . 
 
 enter other servant 
 
 flaviu . all broken implement of a ruin 'd hous . 
 third servant . yet do our heart wear timon 's liveri ; 
 that see i by our face . we are fellow still , 
 serv alik in sorrow . leak 'd is our bark ; 
 and we , poor mate , stand on the die deck , 
 hear the surg threat . we must all part 
 into thi sea of air . 
 flaviu . good fellow all , 
 the latest of my wealth i 'll share amongst you . 
 wherev we shall meet , for timon 's sake , 
 let 's yet be fellow ; let 's shake our head and say , 
 as 'twere a knell unto our master 's fortun , 
 'we have seen better day . ' let each take some . 
 [ give them money ] 
 nay , put out all your hand . not one word more ! 
 thu part we rich in sorrow , part poor . 
 [ embrac , and part sever way ] 
 o the fierc wretched that glori bring us ! 
 who would not wish to be from wealth exempt , 
 sinc rich point to miseri and contempt ? 
 who would be so mock 'd with glori , or to live 
 but in a dream of friendship , 
 to have hi pomp , and all what state compound , 
 but onli paint , like hi varnish 'd friend ? 
 poor honest lord , brought low by hi own heart , 
 undon by good ! strang , unusu blood , 
 when man 's worst sin is he doe too much good ! 
 who then dare to be half so kind again ? 
 for bounti , that make god , doe still mar men . 
 my dearest lord- blest to be most accurst , 
 rich onli to be wretched- thi great fortun 
 are made thi chief afflict . ala , kind lord ! 
 he 's flung in rage from thi ingrat seat 
 of monstrou friend ; nor ha he with him to 
 suppli hi life , or that which can command it . 
 i 'll follow and enquir him out . 
 i 'll ever serv hi mind with my best will ; 
 whilst i have gold , i 'll be hi steward still . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the wood near the sea-shor . befor timon 's cave 
 
 enter timon in the wood 
 
 timon . o bless breed sun , draw from the earth 
 rotten humid ; below thi sister 's orb 
 infect the air ! twinn 'd brother of one womb- 
 whose procreat , resid , and birth , 
 scarc is dividant- touch them with sever fortun : 
 the greater scorn the lesser . not natur , 
 to whom all sore lay sieg , can bear great fortun 
 but by contempt of natur . 
 rais me thi beggar and deny't that lord : 
 the senat shall bear contempt hereditari , 
 the beggar nativ honour . 
 it is the pastur lard the rother 's side , 
 the want that make him lean . who dare , who dare , 
 in puriti of manhood stand upright , 
 and say 'thi man 's a flatter ' ? if one be , 
 so are they all ; for everi grise of fortun 
 is smooth 'd by that below . the learn pate 
 duck to the golden fool . all 's obliqu ; 
 there 's noth level in our curs natur 
 but direct villaini . therefor be abhorr 'd 
 all feast , societi , and throng of men ! 
 hi semblabl , yea , himself , timon disdain . 
 destruct fang mankind ! earth , yield me root . 
 [ dig ] 
 who seek for better of thee , sauc hi palat 
 with thi most oper poison . what is here ? 
 gold ? yellow , glitter , preciou gold ? no , god , 
 i am no idl votarist . root , you clear heaven ! 
 thu much of thi will make black white , foul fair , 
 wrong right , base nobl , old young , coward valiant . 
 ha , you god ! whi thi ? what , thi , you god ? whi , thi 
 will lug your priest and servant from your side , 
 pluck stout men 's pillow from below their heads- 
 thi yellow slave 
 will knit and break religion , bless th ' accur 'd , 
 make the hoar leprosi ador 'd , place thiev 
 and give them titl , knee , and approb , 
 with senat on the bench . thi is it 
 that make the wappen 'd widow wed again- 
 she whom the spital-hous and ulcer sore 
 would cast the gorg at thi embalm and spice 
 to th 'april day again . come , damn 'd earth , 
 thou common whore of mankind , that put odd 
 among the rout of nation , i will make thee 
 do thi right natur . [ march afar off ] 
 ha ! a drum ? th'art quick , 
 but yet i 'll buri thee . thou't go , strong thief , 
 when gouti keeper of thee can not stand . 
 nay , stay thou out for earnest . [ keep some gold ] 
 
 enter alcibiad , with drum and fife , in warlik 
 manner ; and phrynia and timandra 
 
 alcibiad . what art thou there ? speak . 
 timon . a beast , as thou art . the canker gnaw thi heart 
 for show me again the eye of man ! 
 alcibiad . what is thi name ? is man so hate to thee 
 that art thyself a man ? 
 timon . i am misanthropo , and hate mankind . 
 for thi part , i do wish thou wert a dog , 
 that i might love thee someth . 
 alcibiad . i know thee well ; 
 but in thi fortun am unlearn 'd and strang . 
 timon . i know thee too ; and more than that i know thee 
 i not desir to know . follow thi drum ; 
 with man 's blood paint the ground , gule , gule . 
 religi canon , civil law , are cruel ; 
 then what should war be ? thi fell whore of thine 
 hath in her more destruct than thi sword 
 for all her cherubin look . 
 phrynia . thi lip rot off ! 
 timon . i will not kiss thee ; then the rot return 
 to thine own lip again . 
 alcibiad . how came the nobl timon to thi chang ? 
 timon . as the moon doe , by want light to give . 
 but then renew i could not , like the moon ; 
 there were no sun to borrow of . 
 alcibiad . nobl timon , 
 what friendship may i do thee ? 
 timon . none , but to 
 maintain my opinion . 
 alcibiad . what is it , timon ? 
 timon . promis me friendship , but perform none . if thou wilt not 
 promis , the god plagu thee , for thou art man ! if thou dost 
 perform , confound thee , for thou art a man ! 
 alcibiad . i have heard in some sort of thi miseri . 
 timon . thou saw'st them when i had prosper . 
 alcibiad . i see them now ; then wa a bless time . 
 timon . as thine is now , held with a brace of harlot . 
 timandra . is thi th ' athenian minion whom the world 
 voic 'd so regard ? 
 timon . art thou timandra ? 
 timandra . ye . 
 timon . be a whore still ; they love thee not that use thee . 
 give them diseas , leav with thee their lust . 
 make use of thi salt hour . season the slave 
 for tub and bath ; bring down rose-cheek 'd youth 
 to the tub-fast and the diet . 
 timandra . hang thee , monster ! 
 alcibiad . pardon him , sweet timandra , for hi wit 
 are drown 'd and lost in hi calam . 
 i have but littl gold of late , brave timon , 
 the want whereof doth daili make revolt 
 in my penuri band . i have heard , and griev 'd , 
 how curs athen , mindless of thi worth , 
 forget thi great deed , when neighbour state , 
 but for thi sword and fortun , trod upon them- 
 timon . i prithe beat thi drum and get thee gone . 
 alcibiad . i am thi friend , and piti thee , dear timon . 
 timon . how dost thou piti him whom thou dost troubl ? 
 i had rather be alon . 
 alcibiad . whi , fare thee well ; 
 here is some gold for thee . 
 timon . keep it : i can not eat it . 
 alcibiad . when i have laid proud athen on a heap- 
 timon . war'st thou 'gainst athen ? 
 alcibiad . ay , timon , and have caus . 
 timon . the god confound them all in thi conquest ; 
 and thee after , when thou hast conquer 'd ! 
 alcibiad . whi me , timon ? 
 timon . that by kill of villain 
 thou wast born to conquer my countri . 
 put up thi gold . go on . here 's gold . go on . 
 be as a planetari plagu , when jove 
 will o'er some high-vic 'd citi hang hi poison 
 in the sick air ; let not thi sword skip one . 
 piti not honour 'd age for hi white beard : 
 he is an usur . strike me the counterfeit matron : 
 it is her habit onli that is honest , 
 herself 's a bawd . let not the virgin 's cheek 
 make soft thi trenchant sword ; for those milk pap 
 that through the window bar bore at men 's eye 
 are not within the leaf of piti writ , 
 but set them down horribl traitor . spare not the babe 
 whose dimpl smile from fool exhaust their merci ; 
 think it a bastard whom the oracl 
 hath doubt pronounc 'd thi throat shall cut , 
 and minc it san remors . swear against abject ; 
 put armour on thine ear and on thine eye , 
 whose proof nor yell of mother , maid , nor babe , 
 nor sight of priest in holi vestment bleed , 
 shall pierc a jot . there 's gold to pay thi soldier . 
 make larg confus ; and , thi furi spent , 
 confound be thyself ! speak not , be gone . 
 alcibiad . hast thou gold yet ? i 'll take the gold thou givest me , 
 not all thi counsel . 
 timon . dost thou , or dost thou not , heaven 's curs upon thee ! 
 phrynia and timandra . give us some gold , good timon . 
 hast thou more ? 
 timon . enough to make a whore forswear her trade , 
 and to make whore a bawd . hold up , you slut , 
 your apron mountant ; you are not oathabl , 
 although i know you 'll swear , terribl swear , 
 into strong shudder and to heavenli agu , 
 th ' immort god that hear you . spare your oath ; 
 i 'll trust to your condit . be whore still ; 
 and he whose piou breath seek to convert you- 
 be strong in whore , allur him , burn him up ; 
 let your close fire predomin hi smoke , 
 and be no turncoat . yet may your pain six month 
 be quit contrari ! and thatch your poor thin roof 
 with burden of the dead- some that were hang 'd , 
 no matter . wear them , betray with them . whore still ; 
 paint till a hors may mire upon your face . 
 a pox of wrinkl ! 
 phrynia and timandra . well , more gold . what then ? 
 believe't that we 'll do anyth for gold . 
 timon . consumpt sow 
 in hollow bone of man ; strike their sharp shin , 
 and mar men 's spur . crack the lawyer 's voic , 
 that he may never more fals titl plead , 
 nor sound hi quillet shrilli . hoar the flamen , 
 that scold against the qualiti of flesh 
 and not believ himself . down with the nose , 
 down with it flat , take the bridg quit away 
 of him that , hi particular to forese , 
 smell from the gener weal . make curl'd-pat ruffian bald , 
 and let the unscarr 'd braggart of the war 
 deriv some pain from you . plagu all , 
 that your activ may defeat and quell 
 the sourc of all erect . there 's more gold . 
 do you damn other , and let thi damn you , 
 and ditch grave you all ! 
 phrynia and timandra . more counsel with more money , bounteou 
 timon . 
 timon . more whore , more mischief first ; i have given you earnest . 
 alcibiad . strike up the drum toward athen . farewel , timon ; 
 if i thrive well , i 'll visit thee again . 
 timon . if i hope well , i 'll never see thee more . 
 alcibiad . i never did thee harm . 
 timon . ye , thou spok'st well of me . 
 alcibiad . call'st thou that harm ? 
 timon . men daili find it . get thee away , and take 
 thi beagl with thee . 
 alcibiad . we but offend him . strike . 
 drum beat . exeunt all but timon 
 timon . that natur , be sick of man 's unkind , 
 should yet be hungri ! common mother , thou , [ dig ] 
 whose womb unmeasur and infinit breast 
 teem and feed all ; whose self-sam mettl , 
 whereof thi proud child , arrog man , is puff 'd , 
 engend the black toad and adder blue , 
 the gild newt and eyeless venom 'd worm , 
 with all th ' abhor birth below crisp heaven 
 whereon hyperion 's quick'n fire doth shine- 
 yield him , who all thi human son doth hate , 
 from forth thi plenteou bosom , one poor root ! 
 ensear thi fertil and concepti womb , 
 let it no more bring out ingrat man ! 
 go great with tiger , dragon , wolv , and bear ; 
 teem with new monster whom thi upward face 
 hath to the marbl mansion all abov 
 never present ! - o , a root ! dear thank ! - 
 dri up thi marrow , vine , and plough-torn lea , 
 whereof ingrat man , with liquorish draught 
 and morsel unctuou , greas hi pure mind , 
 that from it all consider slips- 
 
 enter apemantu 
 
 more man ? plagu , plagu ! 
 apemantu . i wa direct hither . men report 
 thou dost affect my manner and dost use them . 
 timon . 't is , then , becaus thou dost not keep a dog , 
 whom i would imit . consumpt catch thee ! 
 apemantu . thi is in thee a natur but infect , 
 a poor unmanli melancholi sprung 
 from chang of fortun . whi thi spade , thi place ? 
 thi slave-lik habit and these look of care ? 
 thi flatter yet wear silk , drink wine , lie soft , 
 hug their disea 'd perfum , and have forgot 
 that ever timon wa . shame not these wood 
 by put on the cun of a carper . 
 be thou a flatter now , and seek to thrive 
 by that which ha undon thee : hing thi knee , 
 and let hi veri breath whom thou'lt observ 
 blow off thi cap ; prais hi most viciou strain , 
 and call it excel . thou wast told thu ; 
 thou gav'st thine ear , like tapster that bade welcom , 
 to knave and all approach . 't is most just 
 that thou turn rascal ; hadst thou wealth again 
 rascal should have't . do not assum my like . 
 timon . were i like thee , i 'd throw away myself . 
 apemantu . thou hast cast away thyself , be like thyself ; 
 a madman so long , now a fool . what , think'st 
 that the bleak air , thi boister chamberlain , 
 will put thi shirt on warm ? will these moist tree , 
 that have outliv 'd the eagl , page thi heel 
 and skip when thou point'st out ? will the cold brook , 
 candi with ice , caudl thi morn tast 
 to cure thi o'ernight 's surfeit ? call the creatur 
 whose nake natur live in all the spite 
 of wreak heaven , whose bare unhous trunk , 
 to the conflict element expo 'd , 
 answer mere nature- bid them flatter thee . 
 o , thou shalt find- 
 timon . a fool of thee . depart . 
 apemantu . i love thee better now than e'er i did . 
 timon . i hate thee wors . 
 apemantu . whi ? 
 timon . thou flatter'st miseri . 
 apemantu . i flatter not , but say thou art a caitiff . 
 timon . whi dost thou seek me out ? 
 apemantu . to vex thee . 
 timon . alway a villain 's offic or a fool 's . 
 dost pleas thyself i n't ? 
 apemantu . ay . 
 timon . what , a knave too ? 
 apemantu . if thou didst put thi sour-cold habit on 
 to castig thi pride , 'twere well ; but thou 
 dost it enforcedli . thou'dst courtier be again 
 wert thou not beggar . will miseri 
 outliv incertain pomp , is crown 'd befor . 
 the one is fill still , never complet ; 
 the other , at high wish . best state , contentless , 
 hath a distract and most wretch be , 
 wors than the worst , content . 
 thou should'st desir to die , be miser . 
 timon . not by hi breath that is more miser . 
 thou art a slave whom fortun 's tender arm 
 with favour never clasp 'd , but bred a dog . 
 hadst thou , like us from our first swath , proceed 
 the sweet degre that thi brief world afford 
 to such as may the passiv drug of it 
 freeli command , thou wouldst have plung 'd thyself 
 in gener riot , melt down thi youth 
 in differ bed of lust , and never learn 'd 
 the ici precept of respect , but follow 
 the sug'r game befor thee . but myself , 
 who had the world as my confectionari ; 
 the mouth , the tongu , the eye , and heart of men 
 at duti , more than i could frame employ ; 
 that numberless upon me stuck , as leav 
 do on the oak , have with one winter 's brush 
 fell from their bough , and left me open , bare 
 for everi storm that blows- i to bear thi , 
 that never knew but better , is some burden . 
 thi natur did commenc in suffer ; time 
 hath made thee hard i n't . whi shouldst thou hate men ? 
 they never flatter 'd thee . what hast thou given ? 
 if thou wilt curs , thi father , that poor rag , 
 must be thi subject ; who , in spite , put stuff 
 to some she-beggar and compound thee 
 poor rogu hereditari . henc , be gone . 
 if thou hadst not been born the worst of men , 
 thou hadst been a knave and flatter . 
 apemantu . art thou proud yet ? 
 timon . ay , that i am not thee . 
 apemantu . i , that i wa 
 no prodig . 
 timon . i , that i am one now . 
 were all the wealth i have shut up in thee , 
 i 'd give thee leav to hang it . get thee gone . 
 that the whole life of athen were in thi ! 
 thu would i eat it . [ eat a root ] 
 apemantu . here ! i will mend thi feast . 
 [ offer him food ] 
 timon . first mend my compani : take away thyself . 
 apemantu . so i shall mend mine own by th ' lack of thine . 
 timon . 't is not well mend so ; it is but botch 'd . 
 if not , i would it were . 
 apemantu . what wouldst thou have to athen ? 
 timon . thee thither in a whirlwind . if thou wilt , 
 tell them there i have gold ; look , so i have . 
 apemantu . here is no use for gold . 
 timon . the best and truest ; 
 for here it sleep and doe no hire harm . 
 apemantu . where liest a night , timon ? 
 timon . under that 's abov me . 
 where feed'st thou a day , apemantu ? 
 apemantu . where my stomach . find meat ; or rather , where i eat it . 
 timon . would poison were obedi , and knew my mind ! 
 apemantu . where wouldst thou send it ? 
 timon . to sauc thi dish . 
 apemantu . the middl of human thou never knewest , but the 
 extrem of both end . when thou wast in thi gilt and thi 
 perfum , they mock 'd thee for too much curios ; in thi rag 
 thou know'st none , but art despi 'd for the contrari . there 's a 
 medlar for thee ; eat it . 
 timon . on what i hate i feed not . 
 apemantu . dost hate a medlar ? 
 timon . ay , though it look like thee . 
 apemantu . an th ' hadst hate medlar sooner , thou shouldst have 
 love thyself better now . what man didst thou ever know unthrift 
 that wa belov after hi mean ? 
 timon . who , without those mean thou talk'st of , didst thou ever 
 know belov 'd ? 
 apemantu . myself . 
 timon . i understand thee : thou hadst some mean to keep a dog . 
 apemantu . what thing in the world canst thou nearest compar to 
 thi flatter ? 
 timon . women nearest ; but men , men are the thing themselv . what 
 wouldst thou do with the world , apemantu , if it lay in thi 
 power ? 
 apemantu . give it the beast , to be rid of the men . 
 timon . wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confus of men , and 
 remain a beast with the beast ? 
 apemantu . ay , timon . 
 timon . a beastli ambit , which the god grant thee t ' attain to ! 
 if thou wert the lion , the fox would beguil thee ; if thou wert 
 the lamb , the fox would eat thee ; if thou wert the fox , the lion 
 would suspect thee , when , peradventur , thou wert accu 'd by the 
 ass . if thou wert the ass , thi dul would torment thee ; and 
 still thou liv'dst but as a breakfast to the wolf . if thou wert 
 the wolf , thi greedi would afflict thee , and oft thou 
 shouldst hazard thi life for thi dinner . wert thou the unicorn , 
 pride and wrath would confound thee , and make thine own self the 
 conquest of thi furi . wert thou bear , thou wouldst be kill 'd by 
 the hors ; wert thou a hors , thou wouldst be seiz 'd by the 
 leopard ; wert thou a leopard , thou wert german to the lion , and 
 the spot of thi kindr were juror on thi life . all thi safeti 
 were remot , and thi defenc absenc . what beast couldst thou 
 be that were not subject to a beast ? and what beast art thou 
 alreadi , that seest not thi loss in transform ! 
 apemantu . if thou couldst pleas me with speak to me , thou 
 mightst have hit upon it here . the commonwealth of athen is 
 becom a forest of beast . 
 timon . how ha the ass broke the wall , that thou art out of the 
 citi ? 
 apemantu . yonder come a poet and a painter . the plagu of compani 
 light upon thee ! i will fear to catch it , and give way . when i 
 know not what els to do , i 'll see thee again . 
 timon . when there is noth live but thee , thou shalt be 
 welcom . i had rather be a beggar 's dog than apemantu . 
 apemantu . thou art the cap of all the fool aliv . 
 timon . would thou wert clean enough to spit upon ! 
 apemantu . a plagu on thee ! thou art too bad to curs . 
 timon . all villain that do stand by thee are pure . 
 apemantu . there is no leprosi but what thou speak'st . 
 timon . if i name thee . 
 i 'll beat thee- but i should infect my hand . 
 apemantu . i would my tongu could rot them off ! 
 timon . away , thou issu of a mangi dog ! 
 choler doe kill me that thou art aliv ; 
 i swoon to see thee . 
 apemantu . would thou wouldst burst ! 
 timon . away , 
 thou tediou rogu ! i am sorri i shall lose 
 a stone by thee . [ throw a stone at him ] 
 apemantu . beast ! 
 timon . slave ! 
 apemantu . toad ! 
 timon . rogu , rogu , rogu ! 
 i am sick of thi fals world , and will love nought 
 but even the mere necess upo n't . 
 then , timon , present prepar thi grave ; 
 lie where the light foam of the sea may beat 
 thi graveston daili ; make thine epitaph , 
 that death in me at other ' live may laugh . 
 [ look at the gold ] o thou sweet king-kil , and dear divorc 
 'twixt natur son and sire ! thou bright defil 
 of hymen 's purest bed ! thou valiant mar ! 
 thou ever young , fresh , lov 'd , and delic wooer , 
 whose blush doth thaw the consecr snow 
 that lie on dian 's lap ! thou visibl god , 
 that sold'rest close imposs , 
 and mak'st them kiss ! that speak'st with everi tongu 
 to everi purpos ! o thou touch of heart ! 
 think thi slave man rebel , and by thi virtu 
 set them into confound odd , that beast 
 may have the world in empir ! 
 apemantu . would 'twere so ! 
 but not till i am dead . i 'll say th ' hast gold . 
 thou wilt be throng 'd to shortli . 
 timon . throng 'd to ? 
 apemantu . ay . 
 timon . thi back , i prithe . 
 apemantu . live , and love thi miseri ! 
 timon . long live so , and so die ! [ exit apemantu ] i am quit . more 
 thing like men ? eat , timon , and abhor them . 
 
 enter the banditti 
 
 first bandit . where should he have thi gold ? it is some poor 
 fragment , some slender ort of hi remaind . the mere want of 
 gold and the falling-from of hi friend drove him into thi 
 melancholi . 
 second bandit . it is noi 'd he hath a mass of treasur . 
 third bandit . let us make the assay upon him ; if he care not for't , 
 he will suppli us easili ; if he covet reserv it , how 
 shall 's get it ? 
 second bandit . true ; for he bear it not about him . 't is hid . 
 first bandit . is not thi he ? 
 banditti . where ? 
 second bandit . 't is hi descript . 
 third bandit . he ; i know him . 
 banditti . save thee , timon ! 
 timon . now , thiev ? 
 banditti . soldier , not thiev . 
 timon . both too , and women 's son . 
 banditti . we are not thiev , but men that much do want . 
 timon . your greatest want is , you want much of meat . 
 whi should you want ? behold , the earth hath root ; 
 within thi mile break forth a hundr spring ; 
 the oak bear mast , the briar scarlet hip ; 
 the bounteou housewif natur on each bush 
 lay her full mess befor you . want ! whi want ? 
 first bandit . we can not live on grass , on berri , water , 
 as beast and bird and fish . 
 timon . nor on the beast themselv , the bird , and fish ; 
 you must eat men . yet thank i must you con 
 that you are thiev profess 'd , that you work not 
 in holier shape ; for there is boundless theft 
 in limit profess . rascal thiev , 
 here 's gold . go , suck the subtl blood o ' th ' grape 
 till the high fever seeth your blood to froth , 
 and so scape hang . trust not the physician ; 
 hi antidot are poison , and he slay 
 moe than you rob . take wealth and live togeth ; 
 do villaini , do , sinc you protest to do't , 
 like workmen . i 'll exampl you with thieveri : 
 the sun 's a thief , and with hi great attract 
 rob the vast sea ; the moon 's an arrant thief , 
 and her pale fire she snatch from the sun ; 
 the sea 's a thief , whose liquid surg resolv 
 the moon into salt tear ; the earth 's a thief , 
 that feed and breed by a compostur stol'n 
 from gen'ral excrement- each thing 's a thief . 
 the law , your curb and whip , in their rough power 
 ha uncheck 'd theft . love not yourselv ; away , 
 rob one anoth . there 's more gold . cut throat ; 
 all that you meet are thiev . to athen go , 
 break open shop ; noth can you steal 
 but thiev do lose it . steal not less for thi 
 i give you ; and gold confound you howsoe' ! 
 amen . 
 third bandit . ha almost charm 'd me from my profess by 
 persuad me to it . 
 first bandit . 't is in the malic of mankind that he thu advis 
 us ; not to have us thrive in our mysteri . 
 second bandit . i 'll believ him as an enemi , and give over my 
 trade . 
 first bandit . let us first see peac in athen . there is no time so 
 miser but a man may be true . exeunt thiev 
 
 enter flaviu , to timon 
 
 flaviu . o you god ! 
 is yond despi 'd and ruinou man my lord ? 
 full of decay and fail ? o monument 
 and wonder of good deed evilli bestow 'd ! 
 what an alter of honour 
 ha desp'rat want made ! 
 what viler thing upon the earth than friend , 
 who can bring noblest mind to basest end ! 
 how rare doe it meet with thi time 's guis , 
 when man wa wish 'd to love hi enemi ! 
 grant i may ever love , and rather woo 
 those that would mischief me than those that do ! 
 ha caught me in hi eye ; i will present 
 my honest grief unto him , and as my lord 
 still serv him with my life . my dearest master ! 
 timon . away ! what art thou ? 
 flaviu . have you forgot me , sir ? 
 timon . whi dost ask that ? i have forgot all men ; 
 then , if thou grant'st th'art a man , i have forgot thee . 
 flaviu . an honest poor servant of your . 
 timon . then i know thee not . 
 i never had honest man about me , i . 
 all i kept were knave , to serv in meat to villain . 
 flaviu . the god are wit , 
 nev ' r did poor steward wear a truer grief 
 for hi undon lord than mine eye for you . 
 timon . what , dost thou weep ? come nearer . then i love thee 
 becaus thou art a woman and disclaim'st 
 flinti mankind , whose eye do never give 
 but thorough lust and laughter . piti 's sleep . 
 strang time , that weep with laugh , not with weep ! 
 flaviu . i beg of you to know me , good my lord , 
 t ' accept my grief , and whilst thi poor wealth last 
 to entertain me as your steward still . 
 timon . had i a steward 
 so true , so just , and now so comfort ? 
 it almost turn my danger natur mild . 
 let me behold thi face . sure , thi man 
 wa born of woman . 
 forgiv my gener and exceptless rash , 
 you perpetual-sob god ! i do proclaim 
 one honest man- mistak me not , but one ; 
 no more , i pray- and he 's a steward . 
 how fain would i have hate all mankind ! 
 and thou redeem'st thyself . but all , save thee , 
 i fell with curs . 
 methink thou art more honest now than wise ; 
 for by oppress and betray me 
 thou mightst have sooner got anoth servic ; 
 for mani so arriv at second master 
 upon their first lord 's neck . but tell me true , 
 for i must ever doubt though ne'er so sure , 
 is not thi kind subtl , covet , 
 if not a usur kind , and as rich men deal gift , 
 expect in return twenti for one ? 
 flaviu . no , my most worthi master , in whose breast 
 doubt and suspect , ala , are plac 'd too late ! 
 you should have fear 'd fals time when you did feast : 
 suspect still come where an estat is least . 
 that which i show , heaven know , is mere love , 
 duti , and zeal , to your unmatch mind , 
 care of your food and live ; and believ it , 
 my most honour 'd lord , 
 for ani benefit that point to me , 
 either in hope or present , i 'd exchang 
 for thi one wish , that you had power and wealth 
 to requit me by make rich yourself . 
 timon . look thee , 't is so ! thou singli honest man , 
 here , take . the god , out of my miseri , 
 have sent thee treasur . go , live rich and happi , 
 but thu condit 'd ; thou shalt build from men ; 
 hate all , curs all , show chariti to none , 
 but let the famish 'd flesh slide from the bone 
 ere thou reliev the beggar . give to dog 
 what thou deniest to men ; let prison swallow 'em , 
 debt wither 'em to noth . be men like blast wood , 
 and may diseas lick up their fals blood ! 
 and so , farewel and thrive . 
 flaviu . o , let me stay 
 and comfort you , my master . 
 timon . if thou hat'st curs , 
 stay not ; fli whilst thou art blest and free . 
 ne'er see thou man , and let me ne'er see thee . 
 exeunt sever 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 act v. scene i . 
 the wood . befor timon 's cave 
 
 enter poet and painter 
 
 painter . as i took note of the place , it can not be far where he 
 abid . 
 poet . to be thought of him ? doe the rumour hold for true that he 's 
 so full of gold ? 
 painter . certain . alcibiad report it ; phrynia and timandra had 
 gold of him . he likewis enrich 'd poor straggl soldier with 
 great quantiti . 't is said he gave unto hi steward a mighti sum . 
 poet . then thi break of hi ha been but a tri for hi friend ? 
 painter . noth els . you shall see him a palm in athen again , 
 and flourish with the highest . therefor 't is not amiss we tender 
 our love to him in thi suppo 'd distress of hi ; it will show 
 honestli in us , and is veri like to load our purpos with what 
 they travail for , if it be just and true report that goe of hi 
 have . 
 poet . what have you now to present unto him ? 
 painter . noth at thi time but my visit ; onli i will 
 promis him an excel piec . 
 poet . i must serv him so too , tell him of an intent that 's come 
 toward him . 
 painter . good as the best . promis is the veri air o ' th ' time ; 
 it open the eye of expect . perform is ever the duller 
 for hi act , and but in the plainer and simpler kind of peopl 
 the deed of say is quit out of use . to promis is most 
 courtli and fashion ; perform is a kind of will or 
 testament which argu a great sick in hi judgment that 
 make it . 
 
 enter timon from hi cave 
 
 timon . [ asid ] excel workman ! thou canst not paint a man so bad 
 as is thyself . 
 poet . i am think what i shall say i have provid for him . it 
 must be a person of himself ; a satir against the soft 
 of prosper , with a discoveri of the infinit flatteri that 
 follow youth and opul . 
 timon . [ asid ] must thou need stand for a villain in thine own 
 work ? wilt thou whip thine own fault in other men ? do so , i have 
 gold for thee . 
 poet . nay , let 's seek him ; 
 then do we sin against our own estat 
 when we may profit meet and come too late . 
 painter . true ; 
 when the day serv , befor black-corn 'd night , 
 find what thou want'st by free and offer 'd light . 
 come . 
 timon . [ asid ] i 'll meet you at the turn . what a god 's gold , 
 that he is worshipp 'd in a baser templ 
 than where swine feed ! 
 't is thou that rig'st the bark and plough'st the foam , 
 settlest admir rever in a slave . 
 to thee be worship ! and thi saint for aye 
 be crown 'd with plagu , that thee alon obey ! 
 fit i meet them . [ advanc from hi cave ] 
 poet . hail , worthi timon ! 
 painter . our late nobl master ! 
 timon . have i onc liv 'd to see two honest men ? 
 poet . sir , 
 have often of your open bounti tast , 
 hear you were retir 'd , your friend fall'n off , 
 whose thankless natures- o abhor spirit ! - 
 not all the whip of heaven are larg enough- 
 what ! to you , 
 whose star-lik nobl gave life and influenc 
 to their whole be ! i am rapt , and can not cover 
 the monstrou bulk of thi ingratitud 
 with ani size of word . 
 timon . let it go nake : men may see't the better . 
 you that are honest , by be what you are , 
 make them best seen and known . 
 painter . he and myself 
 have travail 'd in the great show ' r of your gift , 
 and sweetli felt it . 
 timon . ay , you are honest men . 
 painter . we are hither come to offer you our servic . 
 timon . most honest men ! whi , how shall i requit you ? 
 can you eat root , and drink cold water- no ? 
 both . what we can do , we 'll do , to do you servic . 
 timon . y'are honest men . y'have heard that i have gold ; 
 i am sure you have . speak truth ; y'are honest men . 
 painter . so it is said , my nobl lord ; but therefor 
 came not my friend nor i . 
 timon . good honest men ! thou draw'st a counterfeit 
 best in all athen . th'art inde the best ; 
 thou counterfeit'st most live . 
 painter . so , so , my lord . 
 timon . e'en so , sir , as i say . [ to to poet ] and for thi fiction , 
 whi , thi vers swell with stuff so fine and smooth 
 that thou art even natur in thine art . 
 but for all thi , my honest-natur 'd friend , 
 i must need say you have a littl fault . 
 marri , 't is not monstrou in you ; neither wish i 
 you take much pain to mend . 
 both . beseech your honour 
 to make it known to us . 
 timon . you 'll take it ill. 
 both . most thank , my lord . 
 timon . will you inde ? 
 both . doubt it not , worthi lord . 
 timon . there 's never a one of you but trust a knave 
 that mightili deceiv you . 
 both . do we , my lord ? 
 timon . ay , and you hear him cog , see him dissembl , 
 know hi gross patcheri , love him , feed him , 
 keep in your bosom ; yet remain assur 'd 
 that he 's a made-up villain . 
 painter . i know not such , my lord . 
 poet . nor i . 
 timon . look you , i love you well ; i 'll give you gold , 
 rid me these villain from your compani . 
 hang them or stab them , drown them in a draught , 
 confound them by some cours , and come to me , 
 i 'll give you gold enough . 
 both . name them , my lord ; let 's know them . 
 timon . you that way , and you this- but two in compani ; 
 each man apart , all singl and alon , 
 yet an arch-villain keep him compani . 
 [ to the painter ] if , where thou art , two villian shall not be , 
 come not near him . [ to the poet ] if thou wouldst not resid 
 but where one villain is , then him abandon.- 
 henc , pack ! there 's gold ; you came for gold , ye slave . 
 [ to the painter ] you have work for me ; there 's payment ; henc ! 
 [ to the poet ] you are an alchemist ; make gold of that.- 
 out , rascal dog ! [ beat and drive them out ] 
 
 enter flaviu and two senat 
 
 flaviu . it is vain that you would speak with timon ; 
 for he is set so onli to himself 
 that noth but himself which look like man 
 is friendli with him . 
 first senat . bring us to hi cave . 
 it is our part and promis to th ' athenian 
 to speak with timon . 
 second senat . at all time alik 
 men are not still the same ; 't wa time and grief 
 that fram 'd him thu . time , with hi fairer hand , 
 offer the fortun of hi former day , 
 the former man may make him . bring us to him , 
 and chanc it as it may . 
 flaviu . here is hi cave . 
 peac and content be here ! lord timon ! timon ! 
 look out , and speak to friend . th ' athenian 
 by two of their most reverend senat greet thee . 
 speak to them , nobl timon . 
 
 enter timon out of hi cave 
 
 timon . thou sun that comfort , burn . speak and be hang 'd ! 
 for each true word a blister , and each fals 
 be as a cauter to the root o ' th ' tongu , 
 consum it with speak ! 
 first senat . worthi timon- 
 timon . of none but such as you , and you of timon . 
 first senat . the senat of athen greet thee , timon . 
 timon . i thank them ; and would send them back the plagu , 
 could i but catch it for them . 
 first senat . o , forget 
 what we are sorri for ourselv in thee . 
 the senat with one consent of love 
 entreat thee back to athen , who have thought 
 on special digniti , which vacant lie 
 for thi best use and wear . 
 second senat . they confess 
 toward thee forget too gener , gross ; 
 which now the public bodi , which doth seldom 
 play the recant , feel in itself 
 a lack of timon 's aid , hath sens withal 
 of it own fail , restrain aid to timon , 
 and send forth us to make their sorrow render , 
 togeth with a recompens more fruit 
 than their offenc can weigh down by the dram ; 
 ay , even such heap and sum of love and wealth 
 as shall to thee blot out what wrong were their 
 and write in thee the figur of their love , 
 ever to read them thine . 
 timon . you witch me in it ; 
 surpris me to the veri brink of tear . 
 lend me a fool 's heart and a woman 's eye , 
 and i 'll beweep these comfort , worthi senat . 
 first senat . therefor so pleas thee to return with us , 
 and of our athen , thine and our , to take 
 the captainship , thou shalt be met with thank , 
 allow 'd with absolut power , and thi good name 
 live with author . so soon we shall drive back 
 of alcibiad th ' approach wild , 
 who , like a boar too savag , doth root up 
 hi countri 's peac . 
 second senat . and shake hi threat'n sword 
 against the wall of athen . 
 first senat . therefor , timon- 
 timon . well , sir , i will . therefor i will , sir , thu : 
 if alcibiad kill my countrymen , 
 let alcibiad know thi of timon , 
 that timon care not . but if he sack fair athen , 
 and take our goodli age men by th ' beard , 
 give our holi virgin to the stain 
 of contumeli , beastli , mad-brain 'd war , 
 then let him know- and tell him timon speak it 
 in piti of our age and our youth- 
 i can not choos but tell him that i care not , 
 and let him take't at worst ; for their knive care not , 
 while you have throat to answer . for myself , 
 there 's not a whittl in th ' unruli camp 
 but i do prize it at my love befor 
 the reverend'st throat in athen . so i leav you 
 to the protect of the prosper god , 
 as thiev to keeper . 
 flaviu . stay not , all 's in vain . 
 timon . whi , i wa write of my epitaph ; 
 it will be seen to-morrow . my long sick 
 of health and live now begin to mend , 
 and noth bring me all thing . go , live still ; 
 be alcibiad your plagu , you hi , 
 and last so long enough ! 
 first senat . we speak in vain . 
 timon . but yet i love my countri , and am not 
 one that rejoic in the common wreck , 
 as common bruit doth put it . 
 first senat . that 's well spoke . 
 timon . commend me to my love countrymen- 
 first senat . these word becom your lip as they pass through 
 them . 
 second senat . and enter in our ear like great triumpher 
 in their applaud gate . 
 timon . commend me to them , 
 and tell them that , to eas them of their grief , 
 their fear of hostil stroke , their ach , loss , 
 their pang of love , with other incid throe 
 that natur 's fragil vessel doth sustain 
 in life 's uncertain voyag , i will some kind do them- 
 i 'll teach them to prevent wild alcibiad ' wrath . 
 first senat . i like thi well ; he will return again . 
 timon . i have a tree , which grow here in my close , 
 that mine own use invit me to cut down , 
 and shortli must i fell it . tell my friend , 
 tell athen , in the sequenc of degre 
 from high to low throughout , that whoso pleas 
 to stop afflict , let him take hi hast , 
 come hither , ere my tree hath felt the axe , 
 and hang himself . i pray you do my greet . 
 flaviu . troubl him no further ; thu you still shall find him . 
 timon . come not to me again ; but say to athen 
 timon hath made hi everlast mansion 
 upon the beach verg of the salt flood , 
 who onc a day with hi emboss froth 
 the turbul surg shall cover . thither come , 
 and let my graveston be your oracl . 
 lip , let sour word go by and languag end : 
 what is amiss , plagu and infect mend ! 
 grave onli be men 's work and death their gain ! 
 sun , hide thi beam . timon hath done hi reign . 
 exit timon into hi cave 
 first senat . hi discont are unremov 
 coupl to natur . 
 second senat . our hope in him is dead . let us return 
 and strain what other mean is left unto us 
 in our dear peril . 
 first senat . it requir swift foot . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene ii . 
 befor the wall of athen 
 
 enter two other senat with a messeng 
 
 first senat . thou hast pain discov 'd ; are hi file 
 as full as thi report ? 
 messeng . i have spoke the least . 
 besid , hi expedit promis 
 present approach . 
 second senat . we stand much hazard if they bring not timon . 
 messeng . i met a courier , one mine ancient friend , 
 whom , though in gener part we were oppo 'd , 
 yet our old love had a particular forc , 
 and made us speak like friend . thi man wa ride 
 from alcibiad to timon 's cave 
 with letter of entreati , which import 
 hi fellowship i ' th ' caus against your citi , 
 in part for hi sake mov 'd . 
 
 enter the other senat , from timon 
 
 first senat . here come our brother . 
 third senat . no talk of timon , noth of him expect . 
 the enemi ' drum is heard , and fear scour 
 doth choke the air with dust . in , and prepar . 
 our is the fall , i fear ; our foe the snare . exeunt 
 
 
 
 
 scene iii . 
 the timon 's cave , and a rude tomb seen 
 
 enter a soldier in the wood , seek timon 
 
 soldier . by all descript thi should be the place . 
 who 's here ? speak , ho ! no answer ? what is thi ? 
 timon is dead , who hath outstretch 'd hi span . 
 some beast rear 'd thi ; here doe not live a man . 
 dead , sure ; and thi hi grave . what 's on thi tomb 
 i can not read ; the charact i 'll take with wax . 
 our captain hath in everi figur skill , 
 an ag 'd interpret , though young in day ; 
 befor proud athen he 's set down by thi , 
 whose fall the mark of hi ambit is . exit 
 
 
 
 
 scene iv . 
 befor the wall of athen 
 
 trumpet sound . enter alcibiad with hi power befor athen 
 
 alcibiad . sound to thi coward and lascivi town 
 our terribl approach . 
 
 sound a parley . the senat appear upon the wall 
 
 till now you have gone on and fill 'd the time 
 with all licenti measur , make your will 
 the scope of justic ; till now , myself , and such 
 as slept within the shadow of your power , 
 have wander 'd with our traver 'd arm , and breath 'd 
 our suffer vainli . now the time is flush , 
 when crouch marrow , in the bearer strong , 
 cri of itself 'no more ! ' now breathless wrong 
 shall sit and pant in your great chair of eas , 
 and pursi insol shall break hi wind 
 with fear and horrid flight . 
 first senat . nobl and young , 
 when thi first grief were but a mere conceit , 
 ere thou hadst power or we had caus of fear , 
 we sent to thee , to give thi rage balm , 
 to wipe out our ingratitud with love 
 abov their quantiti . 
 second senat . so did we woo 
 transform timon to our citi 's love 
 by humbl messag and by promi 'd mean . 
 we were not all unkind , nor all deserv 
 the common stroke of war . 
 first senat . these wall of our 
 were not erect by their hand from whom 
 you have receiv 'd your grief ; nor are they such 
 that these great tow'r , trophi , and school , should fall 
 for privat fault in them . 
 second senat . nor are they live 
 who were the motiv that you first went out ; 
 shame , that they want cun , in excess 
 hath broke their heart . march , nobl lord , 
 into our citi with thi banner spread . 
 by decim and a tith death- 
 if thi reveng hunger for that food 
 which natur loathes- take thou the destin 'd tenth , 
 and by the hazard of the spot die 
 let die the spot . 
 first senat . all have not offend ; 
 for those that were , it is not squar to take , 
 on those that are , reveng : crime , like land , 
 are not inherit . then , dear countryman , 
 bring in thi rank , but leav without thi rage ; 
 spare thi athenian cradl , and those kin 
 which , in the bluster of thi wrath , must fall 
 with those that have offend . like a shepherd 
 approach the fold and cull th ' infect forth , 
 but kill not all togeth . 
 second senat . what thou wilt , 
 thou rather shalt enforc it with thi smile 
 than hew to't with thi sword . 
 first senat . set but thi foot 
 against our rampir 'd gate and they shall ope , 
 so thou wilt send thi gentl heart befor 
 to say thou't enter friendli . 
 second senat . throw thi glove , 
 or ani token of thine honour els , 
 that thou wilt use the war as thi redress 
 and not as our confus , all thi power 
 shall make their harbour in our town till we 
 have seal 'd thi full desir . 
 alcibiad . then there 's my glove ; 
 descend , and open your uncharg port . 
 those enemi of timon 's and mine own , 
 whom you yourselv shall set out for reproof , 
 fall , and no more . and , to aton your fear 
 with my more nobl mean , not a man 
 shall pass hi quarter or offend the stream 
 of regular justic in your citi 's bound , 
 but shall be render 'd to your public law 
 at heaviest answer . 
 both . 't is most nobli spoken . 
 alcibiad . descend , and keep your word . 
 [ the senat descend and open the gate ] 
 
 enter a soldier as a messeng 
 
 soldier . my nobl gener , timon is dead ; 
 entomb 'd upon the veri hem o ' th ' sea ; 
 and on hi grave-ston thi insculptur , which 
 with wax i brought away , whose soft impress 
 interpret for my poor ignor . 
 
 alcibiad read the epitaph 
 
 'here lie a wretch cors , of wretch soul bereft ; 
 seek not my name . a plagu consum you wick caitiff left ! 
 here lie i , timon , who aliv all live men did hate . 
 pass by , and curs thi fill ; but pass , and stay not here thi 
 gait . ' 
 these well express in thee thi latter spirit . 
 though thou abhorr'dst in us our human grief , 
 scorn'dst our brain 's flow , and those our droplet which 
 from niggard natur fall , yet rich conceit 
 taught thee to make vast neptun weep for aye 
 on thi low grave , on fault forgiven . dead 
 is nobl timon , of whose memori 
 hereaft more . bring me into your citi , 
 and i will use the oliv , with my sword ; 
 make war breed peac , make peac stint war , make each 
 prescrib to other , as each other 's leech . 
 let our drum strike . exeunt 
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 < num > 
 
 the tragedi of titu andronicu 
 
 < stop >