
 
 
 
 <GO> 
 from fairest creatur we desir increas , 
 that therebi beauti 's rose might never die , 
 but as the riper should by time deceas , 
 hi tender heir might bear hi memori : 
 but thou contract to thine own bright eye , 
 feed'st thi light 's flame with self-substanti fuel , 
 make a famin where abund lie , 
 thi self thi foe , to thi sweet self too cruel : 
 thou that art now the world 's fresh ornament , 
 and onli herald to the gaudi spring , 
 within thine own bud buriest thi content , 
 and tender churl mak'st wast in niggard : 
 piti the world , or els thi glutton be , 
 to eat the world 's due , by the grave and thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when forti winter shall besieg thi brow , 
 and dig deep trench in thi beauti 's field , 
 thi youth 's proud liveri so gaze on now , 
 will be a tatter weed of small worth held : 
 then be ask , where all thi beauti lie , 
 where all the treasur of thi lusti day ; 
 to say within thine own deep sunken eye , 
 were an all-eat shame , and thriftless prais . 
 how much more prais deserv thi beauti 's use , 
 if thou couldst answer 'thi fair child of mine 
 shall sum my count , and make my old excus ' 
 prove hi beauti by success thine . 
 thi were to be new made when thou art old , 
 and see thi blood warm when thou feel'st it cold . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 look in thi glass and tell the face thou viewest , 
 now is the time that face should form anoth , 
 whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest , 
 thou dost beguil the world , unbless some mother . 
 for where is she so fair whose unear womb 
 disdain the tillag of thi husbandri ? 
 or who is he so fond will be the tomb , 
 of hi self-lov to stop poster ? 
 thou art thi mother 's glass and she in thee 
 call back the love april of her prime , 
 so thou through window of thine age shalt see , 
 despit of wrinkl thi thi golden time . 
 but if thou live rememb not to be , 
 die singl and thine imag die with thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 unthrifti loveli whi dost thou spend , 
 upon thi self thi beauti 's legaci ? 
 natur 's bequest give noth but doth lend , 
 and be frank she lend to those are free : 
 then beauteou niggard whi dost thou abus , 
 the bounteou largess given thee to give ? 
 profitless usur whi dost thou use 
 so great a sum of sum yet canst not live ? 
 for have traffic with thi self alon , 
 thou of thi self thi sweet self dost deceiv , 
 then how when natur call thee to be gone , 
 what accept audit canst thou leav ? 
 thi unus beauti must be tomb with thee , 
 which use live th ' executor to be . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 those hour that with gentl work did frame 
 the love gaze where everi eye doth dwell 
 will play the tyrant to the veri same , 
 and that unfair which fairli doth excel : 
 for never-rest time lead summer on 
 to hideou winter and confound him there , 
 sap check with frost and lusti leav quit gone , 
 beauti o'er-snow and bare everi where : 
 then were not summer 's distil left 
 a liquid prison pent in wall of glass , 
 beauti 's effect with beauti were bereft , 
 nor it nor no remembr what it wa . 
 but flower distil though they with winter meet , 
 lees but their show , their substanc still live sweet . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 then let not winter 's rag hand defac , 
 in thee thi summer ere thou be distil : 
 make sweet some vial ; treasur thou some place , 
 with beauti 's treasur ere it be self-kil : 
 that use is not forbidden usuri , 
 which happi those that pay the will loan ; 
 that 's for thi self to breed anoth thee , 
 or ten time happier be it ten for one , 
 ten time thi self were happier than thou art , 
 if ten of thine ten time refigur thee : 
 then what could death do if thou shouldst depart , 
 leav thee live in poster ? 
 be not self-wil for thou art much too fair , 
 to be death 's conquest and make worm thine heir . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 lo in the orient when the graciou light 
 lift up hi burn head , each under eye 
 doth homag to hi new-appear sight , 
 serv with look hi sacr majesti , 
 and have climb the steep-up heavenli hill , 
 resembl strong youth in hi middl age , 
 yet mortal look ador hi beauti still , 
 attend on hi golden pilgrimag : 
 but when from highmost pitch with weari car , 
 like feebl age he reeleth from the day , 
 the eye ( fore duteou ) now convert are 
 from hi low tract and look anoth way : 
 so thou , thi self out-go in thi noon : 
 unlook on diest unless thou get a son . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 music to hear , whi hear'st thou music sadli ? 
 sweet with sweet war not , joy delight in joy : 
 whi lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladli , 
 or els receiv'st with pleasur thine annoy ? 
 if the true concord of well-tun sound , 
 by union marri do offend thine ear , 
 they do but sweetli chide thee , who confound 
 in singl the part that thou shouldst bear : 
 mark how one string sweet husband to anoth , 
 strike each in each by mutual order ; 
 resembl sire , and child , and happi mother , 
 who all in one , one pleas note do sing : 
 whose speechless song be mani , seem one , 
 sing thi to thee , 'thou singl wilt prove none ' . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 is it for fear to wet a widow 's eye , 
 that thou consum'st thi self in singl life ? 
 ah , if thou issueless shalt hap to die , 
 the world will wail thee like a makeless wife , 
 the world will be thi widow and still weep , 
 that thou no form of thee hast left behind , 
 when everi privat widow well may keep , 
 by children 's eye , her husband 's shape in mind : 
 look what an unthrift in the world doth spend 
 shift but hi place , for still the world enjoy it ; 
 but beauti 's wast hath in the world an end , 
 and kept unus the user so destroy it : 
 no love toward other in that bosom sit 
 that on himself such murd'rou shame commit . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 for shame deni that thou bear'st love to ani 
 who for thi self art so unprovid . 
 grant if thou wilt , thou art belov of mani , 
 but that thou none lov'st is most evid : 
 for thou art so possess with murd'rou hate , 
 that 'gainst thi self thou stick'st not to conspir , 
 seek that beauteou roof to ruinat 
 which to repair should be thi chief desir : 
 o chang thi thought , that i may chang my mind , 
 shall hate be fairer lodg than gentl love ? 
 be as thi presenc is graciou and kind , 
 or to thi self at least kind-heart prove , 
 make thee anoth self for love of me , 
 that beauti still may live in thine or thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 as fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow'st , 
 in one of thine , from that which thou departest , 
 and that fresh blood which youngli thou bestow'st , 
 thou mayst call thine , when thou from youth convertest , 
 herein live wisdom , beauti , and increas , 
 without thi folli , age , and cold decay , 
 if all were mind so , the time should ceas , 
 and threescor year would make the world away : 
 let those whom natur hath not made for store , 
 harsh , featureless , and rude , barrenli perish : 
 look whom she best endow , she gave thee more ; 
 which bounteou gift thou shouldst in bounti cherish : 
 she carv thee for her seal , and meant therebi , 
 thou shouldst print more , not let that copi die . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when i do count the clock that tell the time , 
 and see the brave day sunk in hideou night , 
 when i behold the violet past prime , 
 and sabl curl all silver o'er with white : 
 when lofti tree i see barren of leav , 
 which erst from heat did canopi the herd 
 and summer 's green all gird up in sheav 
 born on the bier with white and bristli beard : 
 then of thi beauti do i question make 
 that thou among the wast of time must go , 
 sinc sweet and beauti do themselv forsak , 
 and die as fast as they see other grow , 
 and noth 'gainst time 's scyth can make defenc 
 save breed to brave him , when he take thee henc . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o that you were your self , but love you are 
 no longer your , than you your self here live , 
 against thi come end you should prepar , 
 and your sweet semblanc to some other give . 
 so should that beauti which you hold in leas 
 find no determin , then you were 
 your self again after your self 's deceas , 
 when your sweet issu your sweet form should bear . 
 who let so fair a hous fall to decay , 
 which husbandri in honour might uphold , 
 against the stormi gust of winter 's day 
 and barren rage of death 's etern cold ? 
 o none but unthrift , dear my love you know , 
 you had a father , let your son say so . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 not from the star do i my judgement pluck , 
 and yet methink i have astronomi , 
 but not to tell of good , or evil luck , 
 of plagu , of dearth , or season ' qualiti , 
 nor can i fortun to brief minut tell ; 
 point to each hi thunder , rain and wind , 
 or say with princ if it shall go well 
 by oft predict that i in heaven find . 
 but from thine eye my knowledg i deriv , 
 and constant star in them i read such art 
 as truth and beauti shall togeth thrive 
 if from thi self , to store thou wouldst convert : 
 or els of thee thi i prognost , 
 thi end is truth 's and beauti 's doom and date . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when i consid everi thing that grow 
 hold in perfect but a littl moment . 
 that thi huge stage presenteth nought but show 
 whereon the star in secret influenc comment . 
 when i perceiv that men as plant increas , 
 cheer and check even by the self-sam sky : 
 vaunt in their youth sap , at height decreas , 
 and wear their brave state out of memori . 
 then the conceit of thi inconst stay , 
 set you most rich in youth befor my sight , 
 where wast time debateth with decay 
 to chang your day of youth to sulli night , 
 and all in war with time for love of you , 
 as he take from you , i engraft you new . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 but wherefor do not you a mightier way 
 make war upon thi bloodi tyrant time ? 
 and fortifi your self in your decay 
 with mean more bless than my barren rhyme ? 
 now stand you on the top of happi hour , 
 and mani maiden garden yet unset , 
 with virtuou wish would bear you live flower , 
 much liker than your paint counterfeit : 
 so should the line of life that life repair 
 which thi ( time 's pencil ) or my pupil pen 
 neither in inward worth nor outward fair 
 can make you live your self in eye of men . 
 to give away your self , keep your self still , 
 and you must live drawn by your own sweet skill . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 who will believ my vers in time to come 
 if it were fill with your most high desert ? 
 though yet heaven know it is but as a tomb 
 which hide your life , and show not half your part : 
 if i could write the beauti of your eye , 
 and in fresh number number all your grace , 
 the age to come would say thi poet lie , 
 such heavenli touch ne'er touch earthli face . 
 so should my paper ( yellow with their age ) 
 be scorn , like old men of less truth than tongu , 
 and your true right be term a poet 's rage , 
 and stretch metr of an antiqu song . 
 but were some child of your aliv that time , 
 you should live twice in it , and in my rhyme . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 shall i compar thee to a summer 's day ? 
 thou art more love and more temper : 
 rough wind do shake the darl bud of may , 
 and summer 's leas hath all too short a date : 
 sometim too hot the eye of heaven shine , 
 and often is hi gold complexion dim , 
 and everi fair from fair sometim declin , 
 by chanc , or natur 's chang cours untrim : 
 but thi etern summer shall not fade , 
 nor lose possess of that fair thou ow'st , 
 nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in hi shade , 
 when in etern line to time thou grow'st , 
 so long as men can breath or eye can see , 
 so long live thi , and thi give life to thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 devour time blunt thou the lion 's paw , 
 and make the earth devour her own sweet brood , 
 pluck the keen teeth from the fierc tiger 's jaw , 
 and burn the long-liv phoenix , in her blood , 
 make glad and sorri season as thou fleet'st , 
 and do whate' thou wilt swift-foot time 
 to the wide world and all her fade sweet : 
 but i forbid thee one most heinou crime , 
 o carv not with thi hour my love 's fair brow , 
 nor draw no line there with thine antiqu pen , 
 him in thi cours untaint do allow , 
 for beauti 's pattern to succeed men . 
 yet do thi worst old time : despit thi wrong , 
 my love shall in my vers ever live young . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 a woman 's face with natur 's own hand paint , 
 hast thou the master mistress of my passion , 
 a woman 's gentl heart but not acquaint 
 with shift chang as is fals women 's fashion , 
 an eye more bright than their , less fals in roll : 
 gild the object whereupon it gazeth , 
 a man in hue all hue in hi control , 
 which steal men 's eye and women 's soul amazeth . 
 and for a woman wert thou first creat , 
 till natur as she wrought thee fell a-dot , 
 and by addit me of thee defeat , 
 by ad one thing to my purpos noth . 
 but sinc she prick thee out for women 's pleasur , 
 mine be thi love and thi love 's use their treasur . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 so is it not with me as with that muse , 
 stir by a paint beauti to hi vers , 
 who heaven it self for ornament doth use , 
 and everi fair with hi fair doth rehears , 
 make a couplement of proud compar 
 with sun and moon , with earth and sea 's rich gem : 
 with april 's first-born flower and all thing rare , 
 that heaven 's air in thi huge rondur hem . 
 o let me true in love but truli write , 
 and then believ me , my love is as fair , 
 as ani mother 's child , though not so bright 
 as those gold candl fix in heaven 's air : 
 let them say more that like of hearsay well , 
 i will not prais that purpos not to sell . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 my glass shall not persuad me i am old , 
 so long as youth and thou are of one date , 
 but when in thee time 's furrow i behold , 
 then look i death my day should expiat . 
 for all that beauti that doth cover thee , 
 is but the seemli raiment of my heart , 
 which in thi breast doth live , as thine in me , 
 how can i then be elder than thou art ? 
 o therefor love be of thyself so wari , 
 as i not for my self , but for thee will , 
 bear thi heart which i will keep so chari 
 as tender nurs her babe from fare ill. 
 presum not on thi heart when mine is slain , 
 thou gav'st me thine not to give back again . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 as an unperfect actor on the stage , 
 who with hi fear is put besid hi part , 
 or some fierc thing replet with too much rage , 
 whose strength 's abund weaken hi own heart ; 
 so i for fear of trust , forget to say , 
 the perfect ceremoni of love 's rite , 
 and in mine own love 's strength seem to decay , 
 o'ercharg with burthen of mine own love 's might : 
 o let my look be then the eloqu , 
 and dumb presag of my speak breast , 
 who plead for love , and look for recompens , 
 more than that tongu that more hath more express . 
 o learn to read what silent love hath writ , 
 to hear with eye belong to love 's fine wit . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 mine eye hath play the painter and hath stell , 
 thi beauti 's form in tabl of my heart , 
 my bodi is the frame wherein 't is held , 
 and perspect it is best painter 's art . 
 for through the painter must you see hi skill , 
 to find where your true imag pictur lie , 
 which in my bosom 's shop is hang still , 
 that hath hi window glaze with thine eye : 
 now see what good turn eye for eye have done , 
 mine eye have drawn thi shape , and thine for me 
 are window to my breast , where-through the sun 
 delight to peep , to gaze therein on thee ; 
 yet eye thi cun want to grace their art , 
 they draw but what they see , know not the heart . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 let those who are in favour with their star , 
 of public honour and proud titl boast , 
 whilst i whom fortun of such triumph bar 
 unlook for joy in that i honour most ; 
 great princ ' favourit their fair leav spread , 
 but as the marigold at the sun 's eye , 
 and in themselv their pride lie buri , 
 for at a frown they in their glori die . 
 the pain warrior famous for fight , 
 after a thousand victori onc foil , 
 is from the book of honour raze quit , 
 and all the rest forgot for which he toil : 
 then happi i that love and am belov 
 where i may not remov nor be remov . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 lord of my love , to whom in vassalag 
 thi merit hath my duti strongli knit ; 
 to thee i send thi written embassag 
 to wit duti , not to show my wit . 
 duti so great , which wit so poor as mine 
 may make seem bare , in want word to show it ; 
 but that i hope some good conceit of thine 
 in thi soul 's thought ( all nake ) will bestow it : 
 till whatsoev star that guid my move , 
 point on me gracious with fair aspect , 
 and put apparel on my tatter love , 
 to show me worthi of thi sweet respect , 
 then may i dare to boast how i do love thee , 
 till then , not show my head where thou mayst prove me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 weari with toil , i hast me to my bed , 
 the dear respos for limb with travel tire , 
 but then begin a journey in my head 
 to work my mind , when bodi 's work 's expir . 
 for then my thought ( from far where i abid ) 
 intend a zealou pilgrimag to thee , 
 and keep my droop eyelid open wide , 
 look on dark which the blind do see . 
 save that my soul 's imaginari sight 
 present thi shadow to my sightless view , 
 which like a jewel ( hung in ghastli night ) 
 make black night beauteou , and her old face new . 
 lo thu by day my limb , by night my mind , 
 for thee , and for my self , no quiet find . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how can i then return in happi plight 
 that am debar the benefit of rest ? 
 when day 's oppress is not eas by night , 
 but day by night and night by day oppress . 
 and each ( though enemi to either 's reign ) 
 do in consent shake hand to tortur me , 
 the one by toil , the other to complain 
 how far i toil , still farther off from thee . 
 i tell the day to pleas him thou art bright , 
 and dost him grace when cloud do blot the heaven : 
 so flatter i the swart-complexion night , 
 when sparkl star twire not thou gild'st the even . 
 but day doth daili draw my sorrow longer , 
 and night doth nightli make grief 's length seem stronger 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when in disgrac with fortun and men 's eye , 
 i all alon beweep my outcast state , 
 and troubl deaf heaven with my bootless cri , 
 and look upon my self and curs my fate , 
 wish me like to one more rich in hope , 
 featur like him , like him with friend possess , 
 desir thi man 's art , and that man 's scope , 
 with what i most enjoy content least , 
 yet in these thought my self almost despis , 
 hapli i think on thee , and then my state , 
 ( like to the lark at break of day aris 
 from sullen earth ) sing hymn at heaven 's gate , 
 for thi sweet love rememb such wealth bring , 
 that then i scorn to chang my state with king . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when to the session of sweet silent thought , 
 i summon up remembr of thing past , 
 i sigh the lack of mani a thing i sought , 
 and with old woe new wail my dear time 's wast : 
 then can i drown an eye ( unus to flow ) 
 for preciou friend hid in death 's dateless night , 
 and weep afresh love 's long sinc cancel woe , 
 and moan th ' expens of mani a vanish sight . 
 then can i griev at grievanc foregon , 
 and heavili from woe to woe tell o'er 
 the sad account of fore-bemoan moan , 
 which i new pay as if not paid befor . 
 but if the while i think on thee ( dear friend ) 
 all loss are restor , and sorrow end . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thi bosom is endear with all heart , 
 which i by lack have suppos dead , 
 and there reign love and all love 's love part , 
 and all those friend which i thought buri . 
 how mani a holi and obsequi tear 
 hath dear religi love stol'n from mine eye , 
 as interest of the dead , which now appear , 
 but thing remov that hidden in thee lie . 
 thou art the grave where buri love doth live , 
 hung with the trophi of my lover gone , 
 who all their part of me to thee did give , 
 that due of mani , now is thine alon . 
 their imag i love , i view in thee , 
 and thou ( all they ) hast all the all of me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 if thou surviv my well-cont day , 
 when that churl death my bone with dust shall cover 
 and shalt by fortun onc more re-survey 
 these poor rude line of thi deceas lover : 
 compar them with the bett'r of the time , 
 and though they be outstrip by everi pen , 
 reserv them for my love , not for their rhyme , 
 exceed by the height of happier men . 
 o then vouchsaf me but thi love thought , 
 'had my friend 's muse grown with thi grow age , 
 a dearer birth than thi hi love had brought 
 to march in rank of better equipag : 
 but sinc he die and poet better prove , 
 their for their style i 'll read , hi for hi love ' . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 full mani a gloriou morn have i seen , 
 flatter the mountain top with sovereign eye , 
 kiss with golden face the meadow green ; 
 gild pale stream with heavenli alchemi : 
 anon permit the basest cloud to ride , 
 with ugli rack on hi celesti face , 
 and from the forlorn world hi visag hide 
 steal unseen to west with thi disgrac : 
 even so my sun one earli morn did shine , 
 with all triumphant splendour on my brow , 
 but out alack , he wa but one hour mine , 
 the region cloud hath mask him from me now . 
 yet him for thi , my love no whit disdaineth , 
 sun of the world may stain , when heaven 's sun staineth . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 whi didst thou promis such a beauteou day , 
 and make me travel forth without my cloak , 
 to let base cloud o'ertak me in my way , 
 hide thi brav'ri in their rotten smoke ? 
 't is not enough that through the cloud thou break , 
 to dri the rain on my storm-beaten face , 
 for no man well of such a salv can speak , 
 that heal the wound , and cure not the disgrac : 
 nor can thi shame give physic to my grief , 
 though thou repent , yet i have still the loss , 
 th ' offend 's sorrow lend but weak relief 
 to him that bear the strong offenc 's cross . 
 ah but those tear are pearl which thi love shed , 
 and they are rich , and ransom all ill deed . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 no more be griev at that which thou hast done , 
 rose have thorn , and silver fountain mud , 
 cloud and eclips stain both moon and sun , 
 and loathsom canker live in sweetest bud . 
 all men make fault , and even i in thi , 
 author thi trespass with compar , 
 my self corrupt salv thi amiss , 
 excus thi sin more than thi sin are : 
 for to thi sensual fault i bring in sens , 
 thi advers parti is thi advoc , 
 and 'gainst my self a law plea commenc : 
 such civil war is in my love and hate , 
 that i an accessari need must be , 
 to that sweet thief which sourli rob from me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 let me confess that we two must be twain , 
 although our undivid love are one : 
 so shall those blot that do with me remain , 
 without thi help , by me be born alon . 
 in our two love there is but one respect , 
 though in our live a separ spite , 
 which though it alter not love 's sole effect , 
 yet doth it steal sweet hour from love 's delight . 
 i may not evermor acknowledg thee , 
 lest my bewail guilt should do thee shame , 
 nor thou with public kind honour me , 
 unless thou take that honour from thi name : 
 but do not so , i love thee in such sort , 
 as thou be mine , mine is thi good report . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 as a decrepit father take delight , 
 to see hi activ child do deed of youth , 
 so i , made lame by fortun 's dearest spite 
 take all my comfort of thi worth and truth . 
 for whether beauti , birth , or wealth , or wit , 
 or ani of these all , or all , or more 
 entitl in thi part , do crown sit , 
 i make my love engraft to thi store : 
 so then i am not lame , poor , nor despis , 
 whilst that thi shadow doth such substanc give , 
 that i in thi abund am suffic , 
 and by a part of all thi glori live : 
 look what is best , that best i wish in thee , 
 thi wish i have , then ten time happi me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how can my muse want subject to invent 
 while thou dost breath that pour'st into my vers , 
 thine own sweet argument , too excel , 
 for everi vulgar paper to rehears ? 
 o give thi self the thank if aught in me , 
 worthi perus stand against thi sight , 
 for who 's so dumb that can not write to thee , 
 when thou thi self dost give invent light ? 
 be thou the tenth muse , ten time more in worth 
 than those old nine which rhymer invoc , 
 and he that call on thee , let him bring forth 
 etern number to outliv long date . 
 if my slight muse do pleas these curiou day , 
 the pain be mine , but thine shall be the prais . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o how thi worth with manner may i sing , 
 when thou art all the better part of me ? 
 what can mine own prais to mine own self bring : 
 and what is't but mine own when i prais thee ? 
 even for thi , let us divid live , 
 and our dear love lose name of singl one , 
 that by thi separ i may give : 
 that due to thee which thou deserv'st alon : 
 o absenc what a torment wouldst thou prove , 
 were it not thi sour leisur gave sweet leav , 
 to entertain the time with thought of love , 
 which time and thought so sweetli doth deceiv . 
 and that thou teachest how to make one twain , 
 by prais him here who doth henc remain . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 take all my love , my love , yea take them all , 
 what hast thou then more than thou hadst befor ? 
 no love , my love , that thou mayst true love call , 
 all mine wa thine , befor thou hadst thi more : 
 then if for my love , thou my love receivest , 
 i can not blame thee , for my love thou usest , 
 but yet be blame , if thou thi self deceivest 
 by wil tast of what thi self refusest . 
 i do forgiv thi robberi gentl thief 
 although thou steal thee all my poverti : 
 and yet love know it is a greater grief 
 to bear greater wrong , than hate 's known injuri . 
 lascivi grace , in whom all ill well show , 
 kill me with spite yet we must not be foe . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 those pretti wrong that liberti commit , 
 when i am sometim absent from thi heart , 
 thi beauti , and thi year full well befit , 
 for still temptat follow where thou art . 
 gentl thou art , and therefor to be won , 
 beauteou thou art , therefor to be assail . 
 and when a woman woo , what woman 's son , 
 will sourli leav her till he have prevail ? 
 ay me , but yet thou mightst my seat forbear , 
 and chide thi beauti , and thi stray youth , 
 who lead thee in their riot even there 
 where thou art forc to break a twofold truth : 
 her by thi beauti tempt her to thee , 
 thine by thi beauti be fals to me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 that thou hast her it is not all my grief , 
 and yet it may be said i love her dearli , 
 that she hath thee is of my wail chief , 
 a loss in love that touch me more nearli . 
 love offend thu i will excus ye , 
 thou dost love her , becaus thou know'st i love her , 
 and for my sake even so doth she abus me , 
 suff'r my friend for my sake to approv her . 
 if i lose thee , my loss is my love 's gain , 
 and lose her , my friend hath found that loss , 
 both find each other , and i lose both twain , 
 and both for my sake lay on me thi cross , 
 but here 's the joy , my friend and i are one , 
 sweet flatteri , then she love but me alon . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when most i wink then do mine eye best see , 
 for all the day they view thing unrespect , 
 but when i sleep , in dream they look on thee , 
 and darkli bright , are bright in dark direct . 
 then thou whose shadow shadow doth make bright 
 how would thi shadow 's form , form happi show , 
 to the clear day with thi much clearer light , 
 when to unse eye thi shade shine so ! 
 how would ( i say ) mine eye be bless made , 
 by look on thee in the live day , 
 when in dead night thi fair imperfect shade , 
 through heavi sleep on sightless eye doth stay ! 
 all day are night to see till i see thee , 
 and night bright day when dream do show thee me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 if the dull substanc of my flesh were thought , 
 injuri distanc should not stop my way , 
 for then despit of space i would be brought , 
 from limit far remot , where thou dost stay , 
 no matter then although my foot did stand 
 upon the farthest earth remov from thee , 
 for nimbl thought can jump both sea and land , 
 as soon as think the place where he would be . 
 but ah , thought kill me that i am not thought 
 to leap larg length of mile when thou art gone , 
 but that so much of earth and water wrought , 
 i must attend , time 's leisur with my moan . 
 receiv nought by element so slow , 
 but heavi tear , badg of either 's woe . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 the other two , slight air , and purg fire , 
 are both with thee , wherev i abid , 
 the first my thought , the other my desir , 
 these present-abs with swift motion slide . 
 for when these quicker element are gone 
 in tender embassi of love to thee , 
 my life be made of four , with two alon , 
 sink down to death , oppress with melancholi . 
 until life 's composit be recur , 
 by those swift messeng return from thee , 
 who even but now come back again assur , 
 of thi fair health , recount it to me . 
 thi told , i joy , but then no longer glad , 
 i send them back again and straight grow sad . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 mine eye and heart are at a mortal war , 
 how to divid the conquest of thi sight , 
 mine eye , my heart thi pictur 's sight would bar , 
 my heart , mine eye the freedom of that right , 
 my heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie , 
 ( a closet never pierc with crystal eye ) 
 but the defend doth that plea deni , 
 and say in him thi fair appear lie . 
 to side thi titl is impanel 
 a quest of thought , all tenant to the heart , 
 and by their verdict is determin 
 the clear eye 's moieti , and the dear heart 's part . 
 as thu , mine eye 's due is thi outward part , 
 and my heart 's right , thi inward love of heart . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 betwixt mine eye and heart a leagu is took , 
 and each doth good turn now unto the other , 
 when that mine eye is famish for a look , 
 or heart in love with sigh himself doth smother ; 
 with my love 's pictur then my eye doth feast , 
 and to the paint banquet bid my heart : 
 anoth time mine eye is my heart 's guest , 
 and in hi thought of love doth share a part . 
 so either by thi pictur or my love , 
 thi self away , art present still with me , 
 for thou not farther than my thought canst move , 
 and i am still with them , and they with thee . 
 or if they sleep , thi pictur in my sight 
 awak my heart , to heart 's and eye 's delight . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how care wa i when i took my way , 
 each trifl under truest bar to thrust , 
 that to my use it might unus stay 
 from hand of falsehood , in sure ward of trust ! 
 but thou , to whom my jewel trifl are , 
 most worthi comfort , now my greatest grief , 
 thou best of dearest , and mine onli care , 
 art left the prey of everi vulgar thief . 
 thee have i not lock up in ani chest , 
 save where thou art not , though i feel thou art , 
 within the gentl closur of my breast , 
 from whenc at pleasur thou mayst come and part , 
 and even thenc thou wilt be stol'n i fear , 
 for truth prove thievish for a prize so dear . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 against that time ( if ever that time come ) 
 when i shall see thee frown on my defect , 
 when as thi love hath cast hi utmost sum , 
 call to that audit by advis respect , 
 against that time when thou shalt strang pass , 
 and scarc greet me with that sun thine eye , 
 when love convert from the thing it wa 
 shall reason find of settl graviti ; 
 against that time do i ensconc me here 
 within the knowledg of mine own desert , 
 and thi my hand , against my self uprear , 
 to guard the law reason on thi part , 
 to leav poor me , thou hast the strength of law , 
 sinc whi to love , i can alleg no caus . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how heavi do i journey on the way , 
 when what i seek ( my weari travel 's end ) 
 doth teach that case and that repos to say 
 'thu far the mile are measur from thi friend . ' 
 the beast that bear me , tire with my woe , 
 plod dulli on , to bear that weight in me , 
 as if by some instinct the wretch did know 
 hi rider love not speed be made from thee : 
 the bloodi spur can not provok him on , 
 that sometim anger thrust into hi hide , 
 which heavili he answer with a groan , 
 more sharp to me than spur to hi side , 
 for that same groan doth put thi in my mind , 
 my grief lie onward and my joy behind . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thu can my love excus the slow offenc , 
 of my dull bearer , when from thee i speed , 
 from where thou art , whi should i hast me thenc ? 
 till i return of post is no need . 
 o what excus will my poor beast then find , 
 when swift extrem can seem but slow ? 
 then should i spur though mount on the wind , 
 in wing speed no motion shall i know , 
 then can no hors with my desir keep pace , 
 therefor desir ( of perfect'st love be made ) 
 shall neigh ( no dull flesh ) in hi fieri race , 
 but love , for love , thu shall excus my jade , 
 sinc from thee go , he went wilful-slow , 
 toward thee i 'll run , and give him leav to go . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 so am i as the rich whose bless key , 
 can bring him to hi sweet up-lock treasur , 
 the which he will not everi hour survey , 
 for blunt the fine point of seldom pleasur . 
 therefor are feast so solemn and so rare , 
 sinc seldom come in that long year set , 
 like stone of worth they thinli place are , 
 or captain jewel in the carcanet . 
 so is the time that keep you as my chest 
 or as the wardrob which the robe doth hide , 
 to make some special instant special-blest , 
 by new unfold hi imprison pride . 
 bless are you whose worthi give scope , 
 be had to triumph , be lack to hope . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 what is your substanc , whereof are you made , 
 that million of strang shadow on you tend ? 
 sinc everi one , hath everi one , one shade , 
 and you but one , can everi shadow lend : 
 describ adoni and the counterfeit , 
 is poorli imit after you , 
 on helen 's cheek all art of beauti set , 
 and you in grecian tire are paint new : 
 speak of the spring , and foison of the year , 
 the one doth shadow of your beauti show , 
 the other as your bounti doth appear , 
 and you in everi bless shape we know . 
 in all extern grace you have some part , 
 but you like none , none you for constant heart . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o how much more doth beauti beauteou seem , 
 by that sweet ornament which truth doth give ! 
 the rose look fair , but fairer we it deem 
 for that sweet odour , which doth in it live : 
 the canker bloom have full as deep a dye , 
 as the perfum tinctur of the rose , 
 hang on such thorn , and play as wantonli , 
 when summer 's breath their mask bud disclos : 
 but for their virtu onli is their show , 
 they live unwoo , and unrespect fade , 
 die to themselv . sweet rose do not so , 
 of their sweet death , are sweetest odour made : 
 and so of you , beauteou and love youth , 
 when that shall vade , by vers distil your truth . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 not marbl , nor the gild monument 
 of princ shall outliv thi power rhyme , 
 but you shall shine more bright in these content 
 than unswept stone , besmear with sluttish time . 
 when wast war shall statu overturn , 
 and broil root out the work of masonri , 
 nor mar hi sword , nor war 's quick fire shall burn : 
 the live record of your memori . 
 'gainst death , and all-oblivi enmiti 
 shall you pace forth , your prais shall still find room , 
 even in the eye of all poster 
 that wear thi world out to the end doom . 
 so till the judgment that your self aris , 
 you live in thi , and dwell in lover ' eye . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 sweet love renew thi forc , be it not said 
 thi edg should blunter be than appetit , 
 which but to-day by feed is allay , 
 to-morrow sharpen in hi former might . 
 so love be thou , although to-day thou fill 
 thi hungri eye , even till they wink with ful , 
 to-morrow see again , and do not kill 
 the spirit of love , with a perpetu dul : 
 let thi sad interim like the ocean be 
 which part the shore , where two contract new , 
 come daili to the bank , that when they see : 
 return of love , more blest may be the view . 
 or call it winter , which be full of care , 
 make summer 's welcom , thrice more wish , more rare . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 be your slave what should i do but tend , 
 upon the hour , and time of your desir ? 
 i have no preciou time at all to spend ; 
 nor servic to do till you requir . 
 nor dare i chide the world-without-end hour , 
 whilst i ( my sovereign ) watch the clock for you , 
 nor think the bitter of absenc sour , 
 when you have bid your servant onc adieu . 
 nor dare i question with my jealou thought , 
 where you may be , or your affair suppos , 
 but like a sad slave stay and think of nought 
 save where you are , how happi you make those . 
 so true a fool is love , that in your will , 
 ( though you do ani thing ) he think no ill. 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 that god forbid , that made me first your slave , 
 i should in thought control your time of pleasur , 
 or at your hand th ' account of hour to crave , 
 be your vassal bound to stay your leisur . 
 o let me suffer ( be at your beck ) 
 th ' imprison absenc of your liberti , 
 and patienc tame to suffer bide each check , 
 without accus you of injuri . 
 be where you list , your charter is so strong , 
 that you your self may privilag your time 
 to what you will , to you it doth belong , 
 your self to pardon of self-do crime . 
 i am to wait , though wait so be hell , 
 not blame your pleasur be it ill or well . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 if there be noth new , but that which is , 
 hath been befor , how are our brain beguil , 
 which labour for invent bear ami 
 the second burthen of a former child ! 
 o that record could with a backward look , 
 even of five hundr cours of the sun , 
 show me your imag in some antiqu book , 
 sinc mind at first in charact wa done . 
 that i might see what the old world could say , 
 to thi compos wonder of your frame , 
 whether we are mend , or whether better they , 
 or whether revolut be the same . 
 o sure i am the wit of former day , 
 to subject wors have given admir prais . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 like as the wave make toward the pebbl shore , 
 so do our minut hasten to their end , 
 each chang place with that which goe befor , 
 in sequent toil all forward do contend . 
 nativ onc in the main of light , 
 crawl to matur , wherewith be crown , 
 crook eclips 'gainst hi glori fight , 
 and time that gave , doth now hi gift confound . 
 time doth transfix the flourish set on youth , 
 and delv the parallel in beauti 's brow , 
 feed on the rariti of natur 's truth , 
 and noth stand but for hi scyth to mow . 
 and yet to time in hope , my vers shall stand 
 prais thi worth , despit hi cruel hand . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 is it thi will , thi imag should keep open 
 my heavi eyelid to the weari night ? 
 dost thou desir my slumber should be broken , 
 while shadow like to thee do mock my sight ? 
 is it thi spirit that thou send'st from thee 
 so far from home into my deed to pri , 
 to find out shame and idl hour in me , 
 the scope and tenur of thi jealousi ? 
 o no , thi love though much , is not so great , 
 it is my love that keep mine eye awak , 
 mine own true love that doth my rest defeat , 
 to play the watchman ever for thi sake . 
 for thee watch i , whilst thou dost wake elsewher , 
 from me far off , with other all too near . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 sin of self-lov possesseth all mine eye , 
 and all my soul , and all my everi part ; 
 and for thi sin there is no remedi , 
 it is so ground inward in my heart . 
 methink no face so graciou is as mine , 
 no shape so true , no truth of such account , 
 and for my self mine own worth do defin , 
 as i all other in all worth surmount . 
 but when my glass show me my self inde 
 beat and chopt with tan antiqu , 
 mine own self-lov quit contrari i read : 
 self , so self-lov were iniqu . 
 't is thee ( my self ) that for my self i prais , 
 paint my age with beauti of thi day . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 against my love shall be as i am now 
 with time 's injuri hand crush and o'erworn , 
 when hour have drain hi blood and fill hi brow 
 with line and wrinkl , when hi youth morn 
 hath travel on to age 's steepi night , 
 and all those beauti whereof now he 's king 
 are vanish , or vanish out of sight , 
 steal away the treasur of hi spring : 
 for such a time do i now fortifi 
 against confound age 's cruel knife , 
 that he shall never cut from memori 
 my sweet love 's beauti , though my lover 's life . 
 hi beauti shall in these black line be seen , 
 and they shall live , and he in them still green . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when i have seen by time 's fell hand defac 
 the rich-proud cost of outworn buri age , 
 when sometim lofti tower i see down-ras , 
 and brass etern slave to mortal rage . 
 when i have seen the hungri ocean gain 
 advantag on the kingdom of the shore , 
 and the firm soil win of the wateri main , 
 increas store with loss , and loss with store . 
 when i have seen such interchang of state , 
 or state it self confound , to decay , 
 ruin hath taught me thu to rumin 
 that time will come and take my love away . 
 thi thought is as a death which can not choos 
 but weep to have , that which it fear to lose . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 sinc brass , nor stone , nor earth , nor boundless sea , 
 but sad mortal o'ersway their power , 
 how with thi rage shall beauti hold a plea , 
 whose action is no stronger than a flower ? 
 o how shall summer 's honey breath hold out , 
 against the wrack sieg of batt'r day , 
 when rock impregn are not so stout , 
 nor gate of steel so strong but time decay ? 
 o fear medit , where alack , 
 shall time 's best jewel from time 's chest lie hid ? 
 or what strong hand can hold hi swift foot back , 
 or who hi spoil of beauti can forbid ? 
 o none , unless thi miracl have might , 
 that in black ink my love may still shine bright . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 tire with all these for rest death i cri , 
 as to behold desert a beggar born , 
 and needi noth trim in jolliti , 
 and purest faith unhappili forsworn , 
 and gild honour shame misplac , 
 and maiden virtu rude strumpet , 
 and right perfect wrong disgrac , 
 and strength by limp sway disabl 
 and art made tongue-ti by author , 
 and folli ( doctor-lik ) control skill , 
 and simpl truth miscal simplic , 
 and captiv good attend captain ill. 
 tire with all these , from these would i be gone , 
 save that to die , i leav my love alon . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 ah wherefor with infect should he live , 
 and with hi presenc grace impieti , 
 that sin by him advantag should achiev , 
 and lace it self with hi societi ? 
 whi should fals paint imit hi cheek , 
 and steal dead seem of hi live hue ? 
 whi should poor beauti indirectli seek , 
 rose of shadow , sinc hi rose is true ? 
 whi should he live , now natur bankrupt is , 
 beggar of blood to blush through live vein , 
 for she hath no exchequ now but hi , 
 and proud of mani , live upon hi gain ? 
 o him she store , to show what wealth she had , 
 in day long sinc , befor these last so bad . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thu is hi cheek the map of day outworn , 
 when beauti live and die as flower do now , 
 befor these bastard sign of fair were born , 
 or durst inhabit on a live brow : 
 befor the golden tress of the dead , 
 the right of sepulchr , were shorn away , 
 to live a second life on second head , 
 ere beauti 's dead fleec made anoth gay : 
 in him those holi antiqu hour are seen , 
 without all ornament , it self and true , 
 make no summer of anoth 's green , 
 rob no old to dress hi beauti new , 
 and him as for a map doth natur store , 
 to show fals art what beauti wa of yore . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 those part of thee that the world 's eye doth view , 
 want noth that the thought of heart can mend : 
 all tongu ( the voic of soul ) give thee that due , 
 utter bare truth , even so as foe commend . 
 thi outward thu with outward prais is crown , 
 but those same tongu that give thee so thine own , 
 in other accent do thi prais confound 
 by see farther than the eye hath shown . 
 they look into the beauti of thi mind , 
 and that in guess they measur by thi deed , 
 then churl their thought ( although their eye were kind ) 
 to thi fair flower add the rank smell of weed : 
 but whi thi odour matcheth not thi show , 
 the soil is thi , that thou dost common grow . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 that thou art blame shall not be thi defect , 
 for slander 's mark wa ever yet the fair , 
 the ornament of beauti is suspect , 
 a crow that fli in heaven 's sweetest air . 
 so thou be good , slander doth but approv , 
 thi worth the greater be woo of time , 
 for canker vice the sweetest bud doth love , 
 and thou present'st a pure unstain prime . 
 thou hast pass by the ambush of young day , 
 either not assail , or victor be charg , 
 yet thi thi prais can not be so thi prais , 
 to tie up envi , evermor enlarg , 
 if some suspect of ill mask not thi show , 
 then thou alon kingdom of heart shouldst owe . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 no longer mourn for me when i am dead , 
 than you shall hear the surli sullen bell 
 give warn to the world that i am fled 
 from thi vile world with vilest worm to dwell : 
 nay if you read thi line , rememb not , 
 the hand that writ it , for i love you so , 
 that i in your sweet thought would be forgot , 
 if think on me then should make you woe . 
 o if ( i say ) you look upon thi vers , 
 when i ( perhap ) compound am with clay , 
 do not so much as my poor name rehears ; 
 but let your love even with my life decay . 
 lest the wise world should look into your moan , 
 and mock you with me after i am gone . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o lest the world should task you to recit , 
 what merit live in me that you should love 
 after my death ( dear love ) forget me quit , 
 for you in me can noth worthi prove . 
 unless you would devis some virtuou lie , 
 to do more for me than mine own desert , 
 and hang more prais upon deceas i , 
 than niggard truth would willingli impart : 
 o lest your true love may seem fals in thi , 
 that you for love speak well of me untru , 
 my name be buri where my bodi is , 
 and live no more to shame nor me , nor you . 
 for i am shame by that which i bring forth , 
 and so should you , to love thing noth worth . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 that time of year thou mayst in me behold , 
 when yellow leav , or none , or few do hang 
 upon those bough which shake against the cold , 
 bare ruin choir , where late the sweet bird sang . 
 in me thou seest the twilight of such day , 
 as after sunset fadeth in the west , 
 which by and by black night doth take away , 
 death 's second self that seal up all in rest . 
 in me thou seest the glow of such fire , 
 that on the ash of hi youth doth lie , 
 as the death-b , whereon it must expir , 
 consum with that which it wa nourish by . 
 thi thou perceiv'st , which make thi love more strong , 
 to love that well , which thou must leav ere long . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 but be content when that fell arrest , 
 without all bail shall carri me away , 
 my life hath in thi line some interest , 
 which for memori still with thee shall stay . 
 when thou reviewest thi , thou dost review , 
 the veri part wa consecr to thee , 
 the earth can have but earth , which is hi due , 
 my spirit is thine the better part of me , 
 so then thou hast but lost the dreg of life , 
 the prey of worm , my bodi be dead , 
 the coward conquest of a wretch 's knife , 
 too base of thee to be rememb , 
 the worth of that , is that which it contain , 
 and that is thi , and thi with thee remain . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 so are you to my thought as food to life , 
 or as sweet-season shower are to the ground ; 
 and for the peac of you i hold such strife 
 as 'twixt a miser and hi wealth is found . 
 now proud as an enjoy , and anon 
 doubt the filch age will steal hi treasur , 
 now count best to be with you alon , 
 then better that the world may see my pleasur , 
 sometim all full with feast on your sight , 
 and by and by clean starv for a look , 
 possess or pursu no delight 
 save what is had , or must from you be took . 
 thu do i pine and surfeit day by day , 
 or glutton on all , or all away . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 whi is my vers so barren of new pride ? 
 so far from variat or quick chang ? 
 whi with the time do i not glanc asid 
 to new-found method , and to compound strang ? 
 whi write i still all one , ever the same , 
 and keep invent in a note weed , 
 that everi word doth almost tell my name , 
 show their birth , and where they did proceed ? 
 o know sweet love i alway write of you , 
 and you and love are still my argument : 
 so all my best is dress old word new , 
 spend again what is alreadi spent : 
 for as the sun is daili new and old , 
 so is my love still tell what is told . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thi glass will show thee how thi beauti wear , 
 thi dial how thi preciou minut wast , 
 these vacant leav thi mind 's imprint will bear , 
 and of thi book , thi learn mayst thou tast . 
 the wrinkl which thi glass will truli show , 
 of mouth grave will give thee memori , 
 thou by thi dial 's shadi stealth mayst know , 
 time 's thievish progress to etern . 
 look what thi memori can not contain , 
 commit to these wast blank , and thou shalt find 
 those children nurs , deliv from thi brain , 
 to take a new acquaint of thi mind . 
 these offic , so oft as thou wilt look , 
 shall profit thee , and much enrich thi book . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 so oft have i invok thee for my muse , 
 and found such fair assist in my vers , 
 as everi alien pen hath got my use , 
 and under thee their poesi dispers . 
 thine eye , that taught the dumb on high to sing , 
 and heavi ignor aloft to fli , 
 have ad feather to the learn 's wing , 
 and given grace a doubl majesti . 
 yet be most proud of that which i compil , 
 whose influenc is thine , and born of thee , 
 in other ' work thou dost but mend the style , 
 and art with thi sweet grace grace be . 
 but thou art all my art , and dost advanc 
 as high as learn , my rude ignor . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 whilst i alon did call upon thi aid , 
 my vers alon had all thi gentl grace , 
 but now my graciou number are decay , 
 and my sick muse doth give an other place . 
 i grant ( sweet love ) thi love argument 
 deserv the travail of a worthier pen , 
 yet what of thee thi poet doth invent , 
 he rob thee of , and pay it thee again , 
 he lend thee virtu , and he stole that word , 
 from thi behaviour , beauti doth he give 
 and found it in thi cheek : he can afford 
 no prais to thee , but what in thee doth live . 
 then thank him not for that which he doth say , 
 sinc what he owe thee , thou thi self dost pay . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o how i faint when i of you do write , 
 know a better spirit doth use your name , 
 and in the prais thereof spend all hi might , 
 to make me tongue-ti speak of your fame . 
 but sinc your worth ( wide as the ocean is ) 
 the humbl as the proudest sail doth bear , 
 my sauci bark ( inferior far to hi ) 
 on your broad main doth wil appear . 
 your shallowest help will hold me up afloat , 
 whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride , 
 or ( be wreck ) i am a worthless boat , 
 he of tall build , and of goodli pride . 
 then if he thrive and i be cast away , 
 the worst wa thi , my love wa my decay . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 or i shall live your epitaph to make , 
 or you surviv when i in earth am rotten , 
 from henc your memori death can not take , 
 although in me each part will be forgotten . 
 your name from henc immort life shall have , 
 though i ( onc gone ) to all the world must die , 
 the earth can yield me but a common grave , 
 when you entomb in men 's eye shall lie , 
 your monument shall be my gentl vers , 
 which eye not yet creat shall o'er-read , 
 and tongu to be , your be shall rehears , 
 when all the breather of thi world are dead , 
 you still shall live ( such virtu hath my pen ) 
 where breath most breath , even in the mouth of men . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 i grant thou wert not marri to my muse , 
 and therefor mayst without attaint o'erlook 
 the dedic word which writer use 
 of their fair subject , bless everi book . 
 thou art as fair in knowledg as in hue , 
 find thi worth a limit past my prais , 
 and therefor art enforc to seek anew , 
 some fresher stamp of the time-bett day . 
 and do so love , yet when they have devis , 
 what strain touch rhetor can lend , 
 thou truli fair , wert truli sympath , 
 in true plain word , by thi true-tel friend . 
 and their gross paint might be better use , 
 where cheek need blood , in thee it is abus . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 i never saw that you did paint need , 
 and therefor to your fair no paint set , 
 i found ( or thought i found ) you did exceed , 
 that barren tender of a poet 's debt : 
 and therefor have i slept in your report , 
 that you your self be extant well might show , 
 how far a modern quill doth come too short , 
 speak of worth , what worth in you doth grow . 
 thi silenc for my sin you did imput , 
 which shall be most my glori be dumb , 
 for i impair not beauti be mute , 
 when other would give life , and bring a tomb . 
 there live more life in one of your fair eye , 
 than both your poet can in prais devis . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 who is it that say most , which can say more , 
 than thi rich prais , that you alon , are you ? 
 in whose confin immur is the store , 
 which should exampl where your equal grew . 
 lean penuri within that pen doth dwell , 
 that to hi subject lend not some small glori , 
 but he that write of you , if he can tell , 
 that you are you , so dignifi hi stori . 
 let him but copi what in you is writ , 
 not make wors what natur made so clear , 
 and such a counterpart shall fame hi wit , 
 make hi style admir everi where . 
 you to your beauteou bless add a curs , 
 be fond on prais , which make your prais wors . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 my tongue-ti muse in manner hold her still , 
 while comment of your prais richli compil , 
 reserv their charact with golden quill , 
 and preciou phrase by all the muse file . 
 i think good thought , whilst other write good word , 
 and like unlett clerk still cri amen , 
 to everi hymn that abl spirit afford , 
 in polish form of well refin pen . 
 hear you prais , i say 't is so , 't is true , 
 and to the most of prais add someth more , 
 but that is in my thought , whose love to you 
 ( though word come hindmost ) hold hi rank befor , 
 then other , for the breath of word respect , 
 me for my dumb thought , speak in effect . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 wa it the proud full sail of hi great vers , 
 bound for the prize of ( all too preciou ) you , 
 that did my ripe thought in my brain inhears , 
 make their tomb the womb wherein they grew ? 
 wa it hi spirit , by spirit taught to write , 
 abov a mortal pitch , that struck me dead ? 
 no , neither he , nor hi compeer by night 
 give him aid , my vers astonish . 
 he nor that affabl familiar ghost 
 which nightli gull him with intellig , 
 as victor of my silenc can not boast , 
 i wa not sick of ani fear from thenc . 
 but when your counten fill up hi line , 
 then lack i matter , that enfeebl mine . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 farewel ! thou art too dear for my possess , 
 and like enough thou know'st thi estim , 
 the charter of thi worth give thee releas : 
 my bond in thee are all determin . 
 for how do i hold thee but by thi grant , 
 and for that rich where is my deserv ? 
 the caus of thi fair gift in me is want , 
 and so my patent back again is swerv . 
 thi self thou gav'st , thi own worth then not know , 
 or me to whom thou gav'st it , els mistak , 
 so thi great gift upon mispris grow , 
 come home again , on better judgement make . 
 thu have i had thee as a dream doth flatter , 
 in sleep a king , but wake no such matter . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when thou shalt be dispos to set me light , 
 and place my merit in the eye of scorn , 
 upon thi side , against my self i 'll fight , 
 and prove thee virtuou , though thou art forsworn : 
 with mine own weak be best acquaint , 
 upon thi part i can set down a stori 
 of fault conceal , wherein i am attaint : 
 that thou in lose me , shalt win much glori : 
 and i by thi will be a gainer too , 
 for bend all my love thought on thee , 
 the injuri that to my self i do , 
 do thee vantag , double-vantag me . 
 such is my love , to thee i so belong , 
 that for thi right , my self will bear all wrong . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 say that thou didst forsak me for some fault , 
 and i will comment upon that offenc , 
 speak of my lame , and i straight will halt : 
 against thi reason make no defenc . 
 thou canst not ( love ) disgrac me half so ill , 
 to set a form upon desir chang , 
 as i 'll my self disgrac , know thi will , 
 i will acquaint strangl and look strang : 
 be absent from thi walk and in my tongu , 
 thi sweet belov name no more shall dwell , 
 lest i ( too much profan ) should do it wronk : 
 and hapli of our old acquaint tell . 
 for thee , against my self i 'll vow debat , 
 for i must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 then hate me when thou wilt , if ever , now , 
 now while the world is bent my deed to cross , 
 join with the spite of fortun , make me bow , 
 and do not drop in for an after-loss : 
 ah do not , when my heart hath 'scape thi sorrow , 
 come in the rearward of a conquer woe , 
 give not a windi night a raini morrow , 
 to linger out a purpos overthrow . 
 if thou wilt leav me , do not leav me last , 
 when other petti grief have done their spite , 
 but in the onset come , so shall i tast 
 at first the veri worst of fortun 's might . 
 and other strain of woe , which now seem woe , 
 compar with loss of thee , will not seem so . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 some glori in their birth , some in their skill , 
 some in their wealth , some in their bodi 's forc , 
 some in their garment though new-fangl ill : 
 some in their hawk and hound , some in their hors . 
 and everi humour hath hi adjunct pleasur , 
 wherein it find a joy abov the rest , 
 but these particular are not my measur , 
 all these i better in one gener best . 
 thi love is better than high birth to me , 
 richer than wealth , prouder than garment ' cost , 
 of more delight than hawk and hors be : 
 and have thee , of all men 's pride i boast . 
 wretch in thi alon , that thou mayst take , 
 all thi away , and me most wretchcd make . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 but do thi worst to steal thi self away , 
 for term of life thou art assur mine , 
 and life no longer than thi love will stay , 
 for it depend upon that love of thine . 
 then need i not to fear the worst of wrong , 
 when in the least of them my life hath end , 
 i see , a better state to me belong 
 than that , which on thi humour doth depend . 
 thou canst not vex me with inconst mind , 
 sinc that my life on thi revolt doth lie , 
 o what a happi titl do i find , 
 happi to have thi love , happi to die ! 
 but what 's so blessed-fair that fear no blot ? 
 thou mayst be fals , and yet i know it not . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 so shall i live , suppos thou art true , 
 like a deceiv husband , so love 's face , 
 may still seem love to me , though alter new : 
 thi look with me , thi heart in other place . 
 for there can live no hatr in thine eye , 
 therefor in that i can not know thi chang , 
 in mani 's look , the fals heart 's histori 
 is writ in mood and frown and wrinkl strang . 
 but heaven in thi creation did decre , 
 that in thi face sweet love should ever dwell , 
 whate' thi thought , or thi heart 's work be , 
 thi look should noth thenc , but sweet tell . 
 how like eve 's appl doth thi beauti grow , 
 if thi sweet virtu answer not thi show . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 they that have power to hurt , and will do none , 
 that do not do the thing , they most do show , 
 who move other , are themselv as stone , 
 unmov , cold , and to temptat slow : 
 they rightli do inherit heaven 's grace , 
 and husband natur 's rich from expens , 
 tibey are the lord and owner of their face , 
 other , but steward of their excel : 
 the summer 's flower is to the summer sweet , 
 though to it self , it onli live and die , 
 but if that flower with base infect meet , 
 the basest weed outbrav hi digniti : 
 for sweetest thing turn sourest by their deed , 
 lili that fester , smell far wors than weed . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how sweet and love dost thou make the shame , 
 which like a canker in the fragrant rose , 
 doth spot the beauti of thi bud name ! 
 o in what sweet dost thou thi sin enclos ! 
 that tongu that tell the stori of thi day , 
 ( make lascivi comment on thi sport ) 
 can not disprais , but in a kind of prais , 
 name thi name , bless an ill report . 
 o what a mansion have those vice got , 
 which for their habit chose out thee , 
 where beauti 's veil doth cover everi blot , 
 and all thing turn to fair , that eye can see ! 
 take heed ( dear heart ) of thi larg privileg , 
 the hardest knife ill-us doth lose hi edg . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 some say thi fault is youth , some wanton , 
 some say thi grace is youth and gentl sport , 
 both grace and fault are love of more and less : 
 thou mak'st fault grace , that to thee resort : 
 as on the finger of a throne queen , 
 the basest jewel will be well esteem : 
 so are those error that in thee are seen , 
 to truth translat , and for true thing deem . 
 how mani lamb might the stern wolf betray , 
 if like a lamb he could hi look translat ! 
 how mani gazer mightst thou lead away , 
 if thou wouldst use the strength of all thi state ! 
 but do not so , i love thee in such sort , 
 as thou be mine , mine is thi good report . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how like a winter hath my absenc been 
 from thee , the pleasur of the fleet year ! 
 what freez have i felt , what dark day seen ! 
 what old decemb 's bare everywher ! 
 and yet thi time remov wa summer 's time , 
 the teem autumn big with rich increas , 
 bear the wanton burden of the prime , 
 like widow womb after their lord ' deceas : 
 yet thi abund issu seem to me 
 but hope of orphan , and unfath fruit , 
 for summer and hi pleasur wait on thee , 
 and thou away , the veri bird are mute . 
 or if they sing , 't is with so dull a cheer , 
 that leav look pale , dread the winter 's near . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 from you have i been absent in the spring , 
 when proud-pi april ( dress in all hi trim ) 
 hath put a spirit of youth in everi thing : 
 that heavi saturn laugh and leap with him . 
 yet nor the lay of bird , nor the sweet smell 
 of differ flower in odour and in hue , 
 could make me ani summer 's stori tell : 
 or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew : 
 nor did i wonder at the lili 's white , 
 nor prais the deep vermilion in the rose , 
 they were but sweet , but figur of delight : 
 drawn after you , you pattern of all those . 
 yet seem it winter still , and you away , 
 as with your shadow i with these did play . 
 
 
 <GO> 
 the forward violet thu did i chide , 
 sweet thief , whenc didst thou steal thi sweet that smell , 
 if not from my love 's breath ? the purpl pride 
 which on thi soft check for complexion dwell , 
 in my love 's vein thou hast too grossli dy . 
 the lili i condemn for thi hand , 
 and bud of marjoram had stol'n thi hair , 
 the rose fear on thorn did stand , 
 one blush shame , anoth white despair : 
 a third nor red , nor white , had stol'n of both , 
 and to hi robberi had annex thi breath , 
 but for hi theft in pride of all hi growth 
 a veng canker eat him up to death . 
 more flower i note , yet i none could see , 
 but sweet , or colour it had stol'n from thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 where art thou muse that thou forget'st so long , 
 to speak of that which give thee all thi might ? 
 spend'st thou thi furi on some worthless song , 
 darken thi power to lend base subject light ? 
 return forget muse , and straight redeem , 
 in gentl number time so idli spent , 
 sing to the ear that doth thi lay esteem , 
 and give thi pen both skill and argument . 
 rise resti muse , my love 's sweet face survey , 
 if time have ani wrinkl graven there , 
 if ani , be a satir to decay , 
 and make time 's spoil despis everywher . 
 give my love fame faster than time wast life , 
 so thou prevent'st hi scyth , and crook knife . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o truant muse what shall be thi amend , 
 for thi neglect of truth in beauti dy ? 
 both truth and beauti on my love depend : 
 so dost thou too , and therein dignifi : 
 make answer muse , wilt thou not hapli say , 
 'truth need no colour with hi colour fix , 
 beauti no pencil , beauti 's truth to lay : 
 but best is best , if never intermix ' ? 
 becaus he need no prais , wilt thou be dumb ? 
 excus not silenc so , for't lie in thee , 
 to make him much outliv a gild tomb : 
 and to be prais of age yet to be . 
 then do thi offic muse , i teach thee how , 
 to make him seem long henc , as he show now . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 my love is strengthen though more weak in seem , 
 i love not less , though less the show appear , 
 that love is merchand , whose rich esteem , 
 the owner 's tongu doth publish everi where . 
 our love wa new , and then but in the spring , 
 when i wa wont to greet it with my lay , 
 as philomel in summer 's front doth sing , 
 and stop her pipe in growth of riper day : 
 not that the summer is less pleasant now 
 than when her mourn hymn did hush the night , 
 but that wild music burthen everi bough , 
 and sweet grown common lose their dear delight . 
 therefor like her , i sometim hold my tongu : 
 becaus i would not dull you with my song . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 alack what poverti my muse bring forth , 
 that have such a scope to show her pride , 
 the argument all bare is of more worth 
 than when it hath my ad prais besid . 
 o blame me not if i no more can write ! 
 look in your glass and there appear a face , 
 that over-go my blunt invent quit , 
 dull my line , and do me disgrac . 
 were it not sin then strive to mend , 
 to mar the subject that befor wa well ? 
 for to no other pass my vers tend , 
 than of your grace and your gift to tell . 
 and more , much more than in my vers can sit , 
 your own glass show you , when you look in it . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 to me fair friend you never can be old , 
 for as you were when first your eye i eye , 
 such seem your beauti still : three winter cold , 
 have from the forest shook three summer ' pride , 
 three beauteou spring to yellow autumn turn , 
 in process of the season have i seen , 
 three april perfum in three hot june burn , 
 sinc first i saw you fresh which yet are green . 
 ah yet doth beauti like a dial hand , 
 steal from hi figur , and no pace perceiv , 
 so your sweet hue , which methink still doth stand 
 hath motion , and mine eye may be deceiv . 
 for fear of which , hear thi thou age unbr , 
 ere you were born wa beauti 's summer dead . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 let not my love be call idolatri , 
 nor my belov as an idol show , 
 sinc all alik my song and prais be 
 to one , of one , still such , and ever so . 
 kind is my love to-day , to-morrow kind , 
 still constant in a wondrou excel , 
 therefor my vers to constanc confin , 
 one thing express , leav out differ . 
 fair , kind , and true , is all my argument , 
 fair , kind , and true , vari to other word , 
 and in thi chang is my invent spent , 
 three theme in one , which wondrou scope afford . 
 fair , kind , and true , have often live alon . 
 which three till now , never kept seat in one . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when in the chronicl of wast time , 
 i see descript of the fairest wight , 
 and beauti make beauti old rhyme , 
 in prais of ladi dead , and love knight , 
 then in the blazon of sweet beauti 's best , 
 of hand , of foot , of lip , of eye , of brow , 
 i see their antiqu pen would have express , 
 even such a beauti as you master now . 
 so all their prais are but propheci 
 of thi our time , all you prefigur , 
 and for they look but with divin eye , 
 they had not skill enough your worth to sing : 
 for we which now behold these present day , 
 have eye to wonder , but lack tongu to prais . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 not mine own fear , nor the prophet soul , 
 of the wide world , dream on thing to come , 
 can yet the leas of my true love control , 
 suppos as forfeit to a confin doom . 
 the mortal moon hath her eclips endur , 
 and the sad augur mock their own presag , 
 incertainti now crown themselv assur , 
 and peac proclaim oliv of endless age . 
 now with the drop of thi most balmi time , 
 my love look fresh , and death to me subscrib , 
 sinc spite of him i 'll live in thi poor rhyme , 
 while he insult o'er dull and speechless tribe . 
 and thou in thi shalt find thi monument , 
 when tyrant ' crest and tomb of brass are spent . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 what 's in the brain that ink may charact , 
 which hath not figur to thee my true spirit , 
 what 's new to speak , what now to regist , 
 that may express my love , or thi dear merit ? 
 noth sweet boy , but yet like prayer divin , 
 i must each day say o'er the veri same , 
 count no old thing old , thou mine , i thine , 
 even as when first i hallow thi fair name . 
 so that etern love in love 's fresh case , 
 weigh not the dust and injuri of age , 
 nor give to necessari wrinkl place , 
 but make antiqu for aye hi page , 
 find the first conceit of love there bred , 
 where time and outward form would show it dead . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o never say that i wa fals of heart , 
 though absenc seem my flame to qualifi , 
 as easi might i from my self depart , 
 as from my soul which in thi breast doth lie : 
 that is my home of love , if i have rang , 
 like him that travel i return again , 
 just to the time , not with the time exchang , 
 so that my self bring water for my stain , 
 never believ though in my natur reign , 
 all frailti that besieg all kind of blood , 
 that it could so preposter be stain , 
 to leav for noth all thi sum of good : 
 for noth thi wide univers i call , 
 save thou my rose , in it thou art my all . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 ala 't is true , i have gone here and there , 
 and made my self a motley to the view , 
 gore mine own thought , sold cheap what is most dear , 
 made old offenc of affect new . 
 most true it is , that i have look on truth 
 askanc and strang : but by all abov , 
 these blench gave my heart anoth youth , 
 and wors essay prove thee my best of love . 
 now all is done , have what shall have no end , 
 mine appetit i never more will grind 
 on newer proof , to tri an older friend , 
 a god in love , to whom i am confin . 
 then give me welcom , next my heaven the best , 
 even to thi pure and most most love breast . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o for my sake do you with fortun chide , 
 the guilti goddess of my harm deed , 
 that did not better for my life provid , 
 than public mean which public manner breed . 
 thenc come it that my name receiv a brand , 
 and almost thenc my natur is subdu 
 to what it work in , like the dyer 's hand : 
 piti me then , and wish i were renew , 
 whilst like a will patient i will drink , 
 potion of eisel 'gainst my strong infect , 
 no bitter that i will bitter think , 
 nor doubl penanc to correct correct . 
 piti me then dear friend , and i assur ye , 
 even that your piti is enough to cure me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 your love and piti doth th ' impress fill , 
 which vulgar scandal stamp upon my brow , 
 for what care i who call me well or ill , 
 so you o'er-green my bad , my good allow ? 
 you are my all the world , and i must strive , 
 to know my shame and prais from your tongu , 
 none els to me , nor i to none aliv , 
 that my steel sens or chang right or wrong . 
 in so profound abysm i throw all care 
 of other ' voic , that my adder 's sens , 
 to critic and to flatter stop are : 
 mark how with my neglect i do dispens . 
 you are so strongli in my purpos bred , 
 that all the world besid methink are dead . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 sinc i left you , mine eye is in my mind , 
 and that which govern me to go about , 
 doth part hi function , and is partli blind , 
 seem see , but effectu is out : 
 for it no form deliv to the heart 
 of bird , of flower , or shape which it doth latch , 
 of hi quick object hath the mind no part , 
 nor hi own vision hold what it doth catch : 
 for if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight , 
 the most sweet favour or deformed'st creatur , 
 the mountain , or the sea , the day , or night : 
 the crow , or dove , it shape them to your featur . 
 incap of more , replet with you , 
 my most true mind thu maketh mine untru . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 or whether doth my mind be crown with you 
 drink up the monarch 's plagu thi flatteri ? 
 or whether shall i say mine eye saith true , 
 and that your love taught it thi alchemi ? 
 to make of monster , and thing indigest , 
 such cherubin as your sweet self resembl , 
 creat everi bad a perfect best 
 as fast as object to hi beam assembl : 
 o 't is the first , 't is flatteri in my see , 
 and my great mind most kingli drink it up , 
 mine eye well know what with hi gust is 'gree , 
 and to hi palat doth prepar the cup . 
 if it be poison , 't is the lesser sin , 
 that mine eye love it and doth first begin . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 those line that i befor have writ do lie , 
 even those that said i could not love you dearer , 
 yet then my judgment knew no reason whi , 
 my most full flame should afterward burn clearer , 
 but reckon time , whose million accid 
 creep in 'twixt vow , and chang decre of king , 
 tan sacr beauti , blunt the sharp'st intent , 
 divert strong mind to the cours of alt'r thing : 
 ala whi fear of time 's tyranni , 
 might i not then say 'now i love you best , ' 
 when i wa certain o'er incertainti , 
 crown the present , doubt of the rest ? 
 love is a babe , then might i not say so 
 to give full growth to that which still doth grow . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 let me not to the marriag of true mind 
 admit impedi , love is not love 
 which alter when it alter find , 
 or bend with the remov to remov . 
 o no , it is an ever-fix mark 
 that look on tempest and is never shaken ; 
 it is the star to everi wand'r bark , 
 whose worth 's unknown , although hi height be taken . 
 love 's not time 's fool , though rosi lip and cheek 
 within hi bend sickl 's compass come , 
 love alter not with hi brief hour and week , 
 but bear it out even to the edg of doom : 
 if thi be error and upon me prove , 
 i never writ , nor no man ever love . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 accus me thu , that i have scant all , 
 wherein i should your great desert repay , 
 forgot upon your dearest love to call , 
 whereto all bond do tie me day by day , 
 that i have frequent been with unknown mind , 
 and given to time your own dear-purchas right , 
 that i have hoist sail to all the wind 
 which should transport me farthest from your sight . 
 book both my wil and error down , 
 and on just proof surmis , accumul , 
 bring me within the level of your frown , 
 but shoot not at me in your waken hate : 
 sinc my appeal say i did strive to prove 
 the constanc and virtu of your love . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 like as to make our appetit more keen 
 with eager compound we our palat urg , 
 as to prevent our maladi unseen , 
 we sicken to shun sick when we purg . 
 even so be full of your ne'er-cloy sweet , 
 to bitter sauc did i frame my feed ; 
 and sick of welfar found a kind of meet , 
 to be diseas ere that there wa true need . 
 thu polici in love t ' anticip 
 the ill that were not , grew to fault assur , 
 and brought to medicin a health state 
 which rank of good would by ill be cure . 
 but thenc i learn and find the lesson true , 
 drug poison him that so feil sick of you . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 what potion have i drunk of siren tear 
 distil from limbeck foul as hell within , 
 appli fear to hope , and hope to fear , 
 still lose when i saw my self to win ! 
 what wretch error hath my heart commit , 
 whilst it hath thought it self so bless never ! 
 how have mine eye out of their sphere been fit 
 in the distract of thi mad fever ! 
 o benefit of ill , now i find true 
 that better is , by evil still made better . 
 and ruin love when it is built anew 
 grow fairer than at first , more strong , far greater . 
 so i return rebuk to my content , 
 and gain by ill thrice more than i have spent . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 that you were onc unkind befriend me now , 
 and for that sorrow , which i then did feel , 
 need must i under my transgress bow , 
 unless my nerv were brass or hammer steel . 
 for if you were by my unkind shaken 
 as i by your , y'have pass a hell of time , 
 and i a tyrant have no leisur taken 
 to weigh how onc i suffer in your crime . 
 o that our night of woe might have rememb 
 my deepest sens , how hard true sorrow hit , 
 and soon to you , as you to me then tender 
 the humbl salv , which wound bosom fit ! 
 but that your trespass now becom a fee , 
 mine ransom your , and your must ransom me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 't is better to be vile than vile esteem , 
 when not to be , receiv reproach of be , 
 and the just pleasur lost , which is so deem , 
 not by our feel , but by other ' see . 
 for whi should other ' fals adulter eye 
 give salut to my sportiv blood ? 
 or on my frailti whi are frailer spi , 
 which in their will count bad what i think good ? 
 no , i am that i am , and they that level 
 at my abus , reckon up their own , 
 i may be straight though they themselv be bevel ; 
 by their rank thought , my deed must not be shown 
 unless thi gener evil they maintain , 
 all men are bad and in their bad reign . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thi gift , thi tabl , are within my brain 
 full charact with last memori , 
 which shall abov that idl rank remain 
 beyond all date even to etern . 
 or at the least , so long as brain and heart 
 have faculti by natur to subsist , 
 till each to raze oblivion yield hi part 
 of thee , thi record never can be miss : 
 that poor retent could not so much hold , 
 nor need i talli thi dear love to score , 
 therefor to give them from me wa i bold , 
 to trust those tabl that receiv thee more : 
 to keep an adjunct to rememb thee 
 were to import forget in me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 no ! time , thou shalt not boast that i do chang , 
 thi pyramid built up with newer might 
 to me are noth novel , noth strang , 
 they are but dress of a former sight : 
 our date are brief , and therefor we admir , 
 what thou dost foist upon us that is old , 
 and rather make them born to our desir , 
 than think that we befor have heard them told : 
 thi regist and thee i both defi , 
 not wond'r at the present , nor the past , 
 for thi record , and what we see doth lie , 
 made more or less by thi continu hast : 
 thi i do vow and thi shall ever be , 
 i will be true despit thi scyth and thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 if my dear love were but the child of state , 
 it might for fortun 's bastard be unfath , 
 as subject to time 's love or to time 's hate , 
 weed among weed , or flower with flower gather . 
 no it wa build far from accid , 
 it suffer not in smile pomp , nor fall 
 under the blow of thrall discont , 
 whereto th ' invit time our fashion call : 
 it fear not polici that heret , 
 which work on leas of short-numb hour , 
 but all alon stand huge polit , 
 that it nor grow with heat , nor drown with shower . 
 to thi i wit call the fool of time , 
 which die for good , who have live for crime . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 were't aught to me i bore the canopi , 
 with my extern the outward honour , 
 or laid great base for etern , 
 which prove more short than wast or ruin ? 
 have i not seen dweller on form and favour 
 lose all , and more by pay too much rent 
 for compound sweet ; forgo simpl savour , 
 piti thriver in their gaze spent ? 
 no , let me be obsequi in thi heart , 
 and take thou my oblat , poor but free , 
 which is not mix with second , know no art , 
 but mutual render , onli me for thee . 
 henc , thou suborn inform , a true soul 
 when most impeach , stand least in thi control . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o thou my love boy who in thi power , 
 dost hold time 's fickl glass hi fickl hour : 
 who hast by wane grown , and therein show'st , 
 thi lover wither , as thi sweet self grow'st . 
 if natur ( sovereign mistress over wrack ) 
 as thou goest onward still will pluck thee back , 
 she keep thee to thi purpos , that her skill 
 may time disgrac , and wretch minut kill . 
 yet fear her o thou minion of her pleasur , 
 she may detain , but not still keep her treasur ! 
 her audit ( though delay ) answer must be , 
 and her quietu is to render thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 in the old age black wa not count fair , 
 or if it were it bore not beauti 's name : 
 but now is black beauti 's success heir , 
 and beauti slander with a bastard shame , 
 for sinc each hand hath put on natur 's power , 
 fair the foul with art 's fals borrow face , 
 sweet beauti hath no name no holi bower , 
 but is profan , if not live in disgrac . 
 therefor my mistress ' eye are raven black , 
 her eye so suit , and they mourner seem , 
 at such who not born fair no beauti lack , 
 slander creation with a fals esteem , 
 yet so they mourn becom of their woe , 
 that everi tongu say beauti should look so . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 how oft when thou , my music , music play'st , 
 upon that bless wood whose motion sound 
 with thi sweet finger when thou gentli sway'st 
 the wiri concord that mine ear confound , 
 do i envi those jack that nimbl leap , 
 to kiss the tender inward of thi hand , 
 whilst my poor lip which should that harvest reap , 
 at the wood 's bold by thee blush stand . 
 to be so tickl they would chang their state 
 and situat with those danc chip , 
 o'er whom thi finger walk with gentl gait , 
 make dead wood more blest than live lip , 
 sinc sauci jack so happi are in thi , 
 give them thi finger , me thi lip to kiss . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 th ' expens of spirit in a wast of shame 
 is lust in action , and till action , lust 
 is perjur , murd'rou , bloodi full of blame , 
 savag , extrem , rude , cruel , not to trust , 
 enjoy no sooner but despis straight , 
 past reason hunt , and no sooner had 
 past reason hate as a swallow bait , 
 on purpos laid to make the taker mad . 
 mad in pursuit and in possess so , 
 had , have , and in quest , to have extrem , 
 a bliss in proof and prove , a veri woe , 
 befor a joy propos behind a dream . 
 all thi the world well know yet none know well , 
 to shun the heaven that lead men to thi hell . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 my mistress ' eye are noth like the sun , 
 coral is far more red , than her lip red , 
 if snow be white , whi then her breast are dun : 
 if hair be wire , black wire grow on her head : 
 i have seen rose damask , red and white , 
 but no such rose see i in her cheek , 
 and in some perfum is there more delight , 
 than in the breath that from my mistress reek . 
 i love to hear her speak , yet well i know , 
 that music hath a far more pleas sound : 
 i grant i never saw a goddess go , 
 my mistress when she walk tread on the ground . 
 and yet by heaven i think my love as rare , 
 as ani she beli with fals compar . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thou art as tyrann , so as thou art , 
 as those whose beauti proudli make them cruel ; 
 for well thou know'st to my dear dote heart 
 thou art the fairest and most preciou jewel . 
 yet in good faith some say that thee behold , 
 thi face hath not the power to make love groan ; 
 to say they err , i dare not be so bold , 
 although i swear it to my self alon . 
 and to be sure that is not fals i swear , 
 a thousand groan but think on thi face , 
 one on anoth 's neck do wit bear 
 thi black is fairest in my judgment 's place . 
 in noth art thou black save in thi deed , 
 and thenc thi slander as i think proce . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thine eye i love , and they as piti me , 
 know thi heart torment me with disdain , 
 have put on black , and love mourner be , 
 look with pretti ruth upon my pain . 
 and truli not the morn sun of heaven 
 better becom the grey cheek of the east , 
 nor that full star that usher in the even 
 doth half that glori to the sober west 
 as those two mourn eye becom thi face : 
 o let it then as well beseem thi heart 
 to mourn for me sinc mourn doth thee grace , 
 and suit thi piti like in everi part . 
 then will i swear beauti herself is black , 
 and all they foul that thi complexion lack . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 beshrew that heart that make my heart to groan 
 for that deep wound it give my friend and me ; 
 is't not enough to tortur me alon , 
 but slave to slaveri my sweet'st friend must be ? 
 me from my self thi cruel eye hath taken , 
 and my next self thou harder hast engross , 
 of him , my self , and thee i am forsaken , 
 a torment thrice three-fold thu to be cross : 
 prison my heart in thi steel bosom 's ward , 
 but then my friend 's heart let my poor heart bail , 
 whoe'er keep me , let my heart be hi guard , 
 thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol . 
 and yet thou wilt , for i be pent in thee , 
 perforc am thine and all that is in me . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 so now i have confess that he is thine , 
 and i my self am mortgag to thi will , 
 my self i 'll forfeit , so that other mine , 
 thou wilt restor to be my comfort still : 
 but thou wilt not , nor he will not be free , 
 for thou art covet , and he is kind , 
 he learn but surety-lik to write for me , 
 under that bond that him as fist doth bind . 
 the statut of thi beauti thou wilt take , 
 thou usur that put'st forth all to use , 
 and sue a friend , came debtor for my sake , 
 so him i lose through my unkind abus . 
 him have i lost , thou hast both him and me , 
 he pay the whole , and yet am i not free . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 whoever hath her wish , thou hast thi will , 
 and 'will ' to boot , and 'will ' in over-plu , 
 more than enough am i that vex thee still , 
 to thi sweet will make addit thu . 
 wilt thou whose will is larg and spaciou , 
 not onc vouchsaf to hide my will in thine ? 
 shall will in other seem right graciou , 
 and in my will no fair accept shine ? 
 the sea all water , yet receiv rain still , 
 and in abund addeth to hi store , 
 so thou be rich in will add to thi will 
 one will of mine to make thi larg will more . 
 let no unkind , no fair beseech kill , 
 think all but one , and me in that one 'will . ' 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 if thi soul check thee that i come so near , 
 swear to thi blind soul that i wa thi 'will ' , 
 and will thi soul know is admit there , 
 thu far for love , my love-suit sweet fulfil . 
 'will ' , will fulfil the treasur of thi love , 
 ay , fill it full with will , and my will one , 
 in thing of great receipt with case we prove , 
 among a number one is reckon none . 
 then in the number let me pass untold , 
 though in thi store 's account i one must be , 
 for noth hold me , so it pleas thee hold , 
 that noth me , a someth sweet to thee . 
 make but my name thi love , and love that still , 
 and then thou lov'st me for my name is will . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 thou blind fool love , what dost thou to mine eye , 
 that they behold and see not what they see ? 
 they know what beauti is , see where it lie , 
 yet what the best is , take the worst to be . 
 if eye corrupt by over-parti look , 
 be anchor in the bay where all men ride , 
 whi of eye ' falsehood hast thou forg hook , 
 whereto the judgment of my heart is tie ? 
 whi should my heart think that a sever plot , 
 which my heart know the wide world 's common place ? 
 or mine eye see thi , say thi is not 
 to put fair truth upon so foul a face ? 
 in thing right true my heart and eye have er , 
 and to thi fals plagu are they now transfer . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 when my love swear that she is made of truth , 
 i do believ her though i know she lie , 
 that she might think me some untutor youth , 
 unlearn in the world 's fals subtleti . 
 thu vainli think that she think me young , 
 although she know my day are past the best , 
 simpli i credit her false-speak tongu , 
 on both side thu is simpl truth suppress : 
 but wherefor say she not she is unjust ? 
 and wherefor say not i that i am old ? 
 o love 's best habit is in seem trust , 
 and age in love , love not to have year told . 
 therefor i lie with her , and she with me , 
 and in our fault by lie we flatter be . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o call not me to justifi the wrong , 
 that thi unkind lay upon my heart , 
 wound me not with thine eye but with thi tongu , 
 use power with power , and slay me not by art , 
 tell me thou lov'st elsewher ; but in my sight , 
 dear heart forbear to glanc thine eye asid , 
 what need'st thou wound with cun when thi might 
 is more than my o'erpress defenc can bide ? 
 let me excus thee , ah my love well know , 
 her pretti look have been mine enemi , 
 and therefor from my face she turn my foe , 
 that they elsewher might dart their injuri : 
 yet do not so , but sinc i am near slain , 
 kill me outright with look , and rid my pain . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 be wise as thou art cruel , do not press 
 my tongue-ti patienc with too much disdain : 
 lest sorrow lend me word and word express , 
 the manner of my pity-w pain . 
 if i might teach thee wit better it were , 
 though not to love , yet love to tell me so , 
 as testi sick men when their death be near , 
 no news but health from their physician know . 
 for if i should despair i should grow mad , 
 and in my mad might speak ill of thee , 
 now thi ill-wrest world is grown so bad , 
 mad slander by mad ear believ be . 
 that i may not be so , nor thou beli , 
 bear thine eye straight , though thi proud heart go wide . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 in faith i do not love thee with mine eye , 
 for they in thee a thousand error note , 
 but 't is my heart that love what they despis , 
 who in despit of view is pleas to dote . 
 nor are mine car with thi tongu 's tune delight , 
 nor tender feel to base touch prone , 
 nor tast , nor smell , desir to be invit 
 to ani sensual feast with thee alon : 
 but my five wit , nor my five sens can 
 dissuad one foolish heart from serv thee , 
 who leav unsway the like of a man , 
 thi proud heart 's slave and vassal wretch to be : 
 onli my plagu thu far i count my gain , 
 that she that make me sin , award me pain . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 love is my sin , and thi dear virtu hate , 
 hate of my sin , ground on sin love , 
 o but with mine , compar thou thine own state , 
 and thou shalt find it merit not reprov , 
 or if it do , not from those lip of thine , 
 that have profan their scarlet ornament , 
 and seal fals bond of love as oft as mine , 
 rob other ' bed ' revenu of their rent . 
 be it law i love thee as thou lov'st those , 
 whom thine eye woo as mine importun thee , 
 root piti in thi heart that when it grow , 
 thi piti may deserv to piti be . 
 if thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide , 
 by self-exampl mayst thou be deni . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 lo as a care huswif run to catch , 
 one of her feather creatur broke away , 
 set down her babe and make all swift dispatch 
 in pursuit of the thing she would have stay : 
 whilst her neglect child hold her in chase , 
 cri to catch her whose busi care is bent , 
 to follow that which fli befor her face : 
 not prize her poor infant 's discont ; 
 so run'st thou after that which fli from thee , 
 whilst i thi babe chase thee afar behind , 
 but if thou catch thi hope turn back to me : 
 and play the mother 's part , kiss me , be kind . 
 so will i pray that thou mayst have thi will , 
 if thou turn back and my loud cri still . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 two love i have of comfort and despair , 
 which like two spirit do suggest me still , 
 the better angel is a man right fair : 
 the worser spirit a woman colour ill. 
 to win me soon to hell my femal evil , 
 tempteth my better angel from my side , 
 and would corrupt my saint to be a devil : 
 woo hi puriti with her foul pride . 
 and whether that my angel be turn fiend , 
 suspect i may , yet not directli tell , 
 but be both from me both to each friend , 
 i guess one angel in anoth 's hell . 
 yet thi shall i ne'er know but live in doubt , 
 till my bad angel fire my good one out . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 those lip that love 's own hand did make , 
 breath forth the sound that said ' i hate ' , 
 to me that languish for her sake : 
 but when she saw my woeful state , 
 straight in her heart did merci come , 
 chide that tongu that ever sweet , 
 wa use in give gentl doom : 
 and taught it thu anew to greet : 
 ' i hate ' she alter with an end , 
 that follow it as gentl day , 
 doth follow night who like a fiend 
 from heaven to hell is flown away . 
 ' i hate ' , from hate away she threw , 
 and save my life say 'not you ' . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 poor soul the centr of my sin earth , 
 my sin earth these rebel power array , 
 whi dost thou pine within and suffer dearth 
 paint thi outward wall so costli gay ? 
 whi so larg cost have so short a leas , 
 dost thou upon thi fade mansion spend ? 
 shall worm inheritor of thi excess 
 eat up thi charg ? is thi thi bodi 's end ? 
 then soul live thou upon thi servant 's loss , 
 and let that pine to aggrav thi store ; 
 buy term divin in sell hour of dross ; 
 within be fed , without be rich no more , 
 so shall thou feed on death , that feed on men , 
 and death onc dead , there 's no more die then . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 my love is as a fever long still , 
 for that which longer nurseth the diseas , 
 feed on that which doth preserv the ill , 
 th ' uncertain sickli appetit to pleas : 
 my reason the physician to my love , 
 angri that hi prescript are not kept 
 hath left me , and i desper now approv , 
 desir is death , which physic did except . 
 past cure i am , now reason is past care , 
 and frantic-mad with evermor unrest , 
 my thought and my discours as mad men 's are , 
 at random from the truth vainli express . 
 for i have sworn thee fair , and thought thee bright , 
 who art as black as hell , as dark as night . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o me ! what eye hath love put in my head , 
 which have no correspond with true sight , 
 or if they have , where is my judgment fled , 
 that censur fals what they see aright ? 
 if that be fair whereon my fals eye dote , 
 what mean the world to say it is not so ? 
 if it be not , then love doth well denot , 
 love 's eye is not so true as all men 's : no , 
 how can it ? o how can love 's eye be true , 
 that is so vex with watch and with tear ? 
 no marvel then though i mistak my view , 
 the sun it self see not , till heaven clear . 
 o cun love , with tear thou keep'st me blind , 
 lest eye well-se thi foul fault should find . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 canst thou o cruel , say i love thee not , 
 when i against my self with thee partak ? 
 do i not think on thee when i forgot 
 am of my self , all-tyr , for thi sake ? 
 who hateth thee that i do call my friend , 
 on whom frown'st thou that i do fawn upon , 
 nay if thou lour'st on me do i not spend 
 reveng upon my self with present moan ? 
 what merit do i in my self respect , 
 that is so proud thi servic to despis , 
 when all my best doth worship thi defect , 
 command by the motion of thine eye ? 
 but love hate on for now i know thi mind , 
 those that can see thou lov'st , and i am blind . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 o from what power hast thou thi power might , 
 with insuffici my heart to sway , 
 to make me give the lie to my true sight , 
 and swear that bright doth not grace the day ? 
 whenc hast thou thi becom of thing ill , 
 that in the veri refus of thi deed , 
 there is such strength and warrantis of skill , 
 that in my mind thi worst all best exce ? 
 who taught thee how to make me love thee more , 
 the more i hear and see just caus of hate ? 
 o though i love what other do abhor , 
 with other thou shouldst not abhor my state . 
 if thi unworthi rais love in me , 
 more worthi i to be belov of thee . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 love is too young to know what conscienc is , 
 yet who know not conscienc is born of love ? 
 then gentl cheater urg not my amiss , 
 lest guilti of my fault thi sweet self prove . 
 for thou betray me , i do betray 
 my nobler part to my gross bodi 's treason , 
 my soul doth tell my bodi that he may , 
 triumph in love , flesh stay no farther reason , 
 but rise at thi name doth point out thee , 
 as hi triumphant prize , proud of thi pride , 
 he is content thi poor drudg to be , 
 to stand in thi affair , fall by thi side . 
 no want of conscienc hold it that i call , 
 her love , for whose dear love i rise and fall . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 in love thee thou know'st i am forsworn , 
 but thou art twice forsworn to me love swear , 
 in act thi bed-vow broke and new faith torn , 
 in vow new hate after new love bear : 
 but whi of two oath ' breach do i accus thee , 
 when i break twenti ? i am perjur most , 
 for all my vow are oath but to misus thee : 
 and all my honest faith in thee is lost . 
 for i have sworn deep oath of thi deep kind : 
 oath of thi love , thi truth , thi constanc , 
 and to enlighten thee gave eye to blind , 
 or made them swear against the thing they see . 
 for i have sworn thee fair : more perjur i , 
 to swear against the truth so foul a be . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 cupid laid by hi brand and fell asleep , 
 a maid of dian 's thi advantag found , 
 and hi love-kindl fire did quickli steep 
 in a cold valley-fountain of that ground : 
 which borrow from thi holi fire of love , 
 a dateless live heat still to endur , 
 and grew a seet bath which yet men prove , 
 against strang maladi a sovereign cure : 
 but at my mistress ' eye love 's brand new-fir , 
 the boy for trial need would touch my breast , 
 i sick withal the help of bath desir , 
 and thither hie a sad distemp guest . 
 but found no cure , the bath for my help lie , 
 where cupid got new fire ; my mistress ' eye . 
 <VER>
 
 <GO> 
 the littl love-god lie onc asleep , 
 laid by hi side hi heart-inflam brand , 
 whilst mani nymph that vow chast life to keep , 
 came trip by , but in her maiden hand , 
 the fairest votari took up that fire , 
 which mani legion of true heart had warm , 
 and so the gener of hot desir , 
 wa sleep by a virgin hand disarm . 
 thi brand she quench in a cool well by , 
 which from love 's fire took heat perpetu , 
 grow a bath and health remedi , 
 for men discas , but i my mistress ' thrall , 
 came there for cure and thi by that i prove , 
 love 's fire heat water , water cool not love . 
 <VER>
 
 the end 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 <GO> 
 
 all well that end well 
 
 < stop >